 þTable of Contents
Table of Contents 1
Document Outline 349
The Path of the Spiritual Sun: Celebrating the Solstices and Equinoxes By Belsebuub and Angela Pritchard
Copyright © 2011, 2012, 2013 by Mark H Pritchard and Angela Pritchard
All rights reserved.
Published 2013 by Mystical Life Publications Ltd www.mysticallifepublications.org
ISBN: 978-0-9923084-3-8
Belsebuub s official website: www.belsebuub.com
The contents of this book were first published in a series of internet articles on the website www.belsebuub.com between June 2011 and June 2013. We are constantly learning and improving what we do, so the contents of this book may be updated in future editions to reflect corrections or new information. Our field of expertise is esoteric knowledge and spiritual experience; we are not historians or scientists.
Therefore the emphasis of this book is not on history or science rather we have used it to illustrate the core spiritual knowledge found throughout it.
All chapters of this book were jointly authored by Belsebuub who contributed the esoteric knowledge from his own experience of the process of enlightenment, and Angela Pritchard who contributed the historical and academic research, except the ceremonies which were written entirely by Belsebuub.
Illustrations and photographs: Most of the illustrations and photographs used in this book have been sourced from the Wikimedia Commons resource at http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Images. Our use of these images does not indicate that the owners of these images endorse the contents of this book. If the image is not attributed to an author, it is most often because it is in the public domain or it is an image Mystical Life Publications Ltd created and owns the copyright to. Most of the images which are attributed to an author are licensed under a Creative Commons license. If you wish to use any of the images in this book, please locate it along with its terms of use in the Wikimedia Commons resource. If you reproduce any images from this book without first locating the terms of its reproduction, you do so at your own risk, and we disclaim any liability arising therefrom.
FAIR USE/DEALING NOTICE: All images used in this book have been reproduced solely for the non-profit, non-commercial purposes of educational and academic commentary and review as this book has been provided to the public completely free of charge in an effort to inform, educate, and advance the understanding of all humankind. Wherever possible we have used images in the public domain, or that have been provided under a Creative Commons license. All images and illustrations have been used for commenting upon and reviewing spiritual, anthropological, historical, and scientific principles and artifacts deemed significant and important to all of humanity. We believe this constitutes a 'fair use' of the copyrighted material as provided for in Section 107 of the US Copyright Law which contains a list of the various purposes for which the reproduction of a particular work may be considered fair, such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research and under Section 41 and 103A of the Australian Copyright act of 1968.
IMPORTANT NOTICE: This publication is intended to provide helpful and informative material on the subjects addressed herein and is purchased or downloaded with the understanding that the authors and publisher are not engaged in rendering professional advice or services to the individual reader. The information contained in this book is not intended as a substitute for consulting with a health care professional. If you are suffering any medical condition, we encourage you to consult with a medical professional.
The accuracy and completeness of the information provided herein and the advice stated herein is not guaranteed or warranted to produce any particular results and the advice and strategies provided may not be suitable for every individual.
The authors and the publisher disclaim any liability for loss, injury, or damages resulting directly or indirectly from the use or application of any of the contents of this book including any loss or injury resulting directly or indirectly from the negligence of the authors or publisher. Any application of the material set forth in the following pages is at the reader s discretion and is his or her sole responsibility.
Contents
PART I: The Spiritual Messages in the Solstices and Equinoxes
Chapter One
The Significance of the Solstice and Equinox in Spirituality
Autumn Equinox
The Descent into Inner Darkness
Chapter Two
The Spiritual Meaning of the Autumn Equinox
Chapter Three
Ancient Sacred Sites Aligned to the Autumn Equinox
Winter Solstice
The Birth of the Spiritual Son
Chapter Four
The Spiritual Meaning of the Winter Solstice
Chapter Five
The Symbolic Meaning of Christmas
Chapter Six
Ancient Sacred Sites Aligned to the Winter Solstice
Spring Equinox
Resurrection and Re-integration with the Spiritual Mother
Chapter Seven
The Spiritual Meaning of the Spring Equinox
Chapter Eight
Ancient Sacred Sites Aligned to the Spring Equinox
Chapter Nine
Decoding the Ancient Meaning of the Sphinx and Its Origin as Anubis
Summer Solstice
Ascent to the Spiritual Father and Unification of the Three Forces of Creation
Chapter Ten
The Spiritual Meaning of the Summer Solstice
Chapter Eleven
Ancient Sacred Sites Aligned to the Summer Solstice
PART II: Ceremonites and Rituals for Celebrating the Solstice and Equinox
Chapter Twelve
A Guide to Celebrating the Solstice and Equinox
Autumn Equinox
Chapter Thirteen
A Ceremony to Celebrate the Autumn Equinox
Winter Solstice
Chapter Fourteen
A Ceremony to Celebrate the Winter Solstice
Chapter Fifteen
Mantras to Celebrate the Winter Solstice
Spring Equinox
Chapter Sixteen
A Ceremony to Celebrate the Spring Equinox
Summer Solstice
Chapter Seventeen
A Ceremony to Celebrate the Summer Solstice
Conclusion
PART I
THE SPIRITUAL MESSAGES IN THE SOLSTICES
AND EQUINOXES
CHAPTER ONE
The Significance of the Solstice and Equinox in
Spirituality
~ the universal and eternal knowledge of awakening ~
Tens of thousands gathered at Stonehenge to witness its alignment to the summer solstice sunrise (photo copyright Andrew Dunn, 2005).
The ancient veneration of the sun is one of the greatest celebrations in history. It has been encoded in sacred texts and sites by peoples separated by vast distances for thousands of years across the world all
the way from the Great Pyramids of Egypt to the huge stone statues of Easter Island. The sun is one of the oldest and most universal themes connecting the ancient wisdom traditions of the world, and yet its deeper meaning has continued to elude our modern society.
It s estimated ancient cultures built hundreds (if not thousands) of huge megalithic structures, stone circles, temples, and secret inner rooms that aligned with the sun at its major annual stages the solstices and equinoxes across Europe and Britain, in Egypt, North and South America, Easter Island, Australia, Asia, and many other parts of the world.
Most today see it as a form of sun or agricultural worship and pagan celebration to do with the seasons and yet some of these sites have endured as the most enigmatic and mystical places in the world, and remain some of the most advanced sites astronomically, mathematically, architecturally, and spiritually in history and even still today, echoing a Golden Age of spirituality from the depths of our pre-history into a modern world so distanced from natural and cosmic principles that it has failed to recognize what is hidden in plain sight.
The sun, source of all light and life, is central to a cosmic spirituality that is both ancient and timeless
and as ever-present as always. Its principles have formed the basis of many of the world s religions
unbeknownst even to many of their adherents and are just as relevant to people searching for spirituality today.
This book delves into the profound spiritual significance of the veneration of the sun, pulling together the sites, texts, traditions, and symbols from around the world that were based on the solar cycle to reveal the common thread of spirituality running like a current of eternal knowledge through all of them. This knowledge has then been used to form a practical guide to celebrate the spiritual sun just as it was in ancient times, incorporating sacred symbols and texts from Egypt, to the Druids, Mayans, and Hindus, for peoples to re-enliven and experience the spirituality of the cosmos again all over the world.
A diagram of the solstices and equinoxes from the viewer s perspective of the sun from the earth.
The journey of the sun through the sky (or rather our planet s journey around it) can be marked at four distinct points: the spring equinox, summer solstice, autumn equinox, and winter solstice, each at equidistant points of the year forming the symbol of the cross within the wheel of the year with the sun at the center. These points mark the movements of the earth around the sun and the sun s varying influence over light and darkness, day and night, and the passage of the seasons, but they also hold a greater spiritual significance.
As Above, So Below
Here the alchemist (who transforms the lead of the personality into the gold of the spirit) draws our attention to the relationship between the world contained in the smaller circle in which we find ourselves, and the world contained in the larger circle that is, between the microcosmic and the macrocosmic, as well as the mathematical principles that apply to both. The alchemist looks above, whilst the figure of the man in the drawing, points below.
It is easy to write ancient spiritual people off as simple-minded nature worshippers. But there is a reason why natural principles are found throughout sacred texts and ancient sites this is because there are universal principles that govern all of creation, including all life in the largest to the smallest of scales.
Thus we can see the same principles of the macrocosmic movement of the planets, in the microcosmic structure of an atom. Mathematically, in the spiral of a galaxy, we see the spiral of a shell, and the unfolding of a fern. The principles that govern all life above us, also govern life here below on earth.
Man takes his law from the Earth; the Earth takes its law from Heaven; Heaven takes its law from Tao; but the law of Tao is its own spontaneity.
~ The Tao Te Ching
Going further, not only do the principles of life and creation govern the outer world, but they also govern the inner, spiritual world, which can t be seen, yet is felt and experienced nevertheless.
Spirituality exists in the very fabric of life. Thus when someone studies natural principles, they find spirituality and the supernatural, and why scientists are now theorizing about the existence of other
dimensions, parallel universes, and the inexplicable realm of possibilities, energy, and matter, from the study of the behavior and structure of minute particles. The sun in its movement throughout the course of the year then becomes a symbol of something much, much greater than a physical object bringing the change of seasons.
The Spiritual Sun
In sacred texts and traditions around the world there are references to an ancient spiritual veneration of the sun it can be found in Egypt, the beliefs of the Druids, the Essenes, Mayans, and Incas, in the
esoteric texts of Christianity, the Eleusinian mysteries of ancient Greece, the esoteric schools of Mithraism originating in Persia and found underground in Rome, and in many other places around the world.
This is because the annual journey of the sun is symbolic of the journey to enlightenment. Ancient peoples expressed this wisdom according to their time and culture, yet their sacred teachings and symbols share many similarities because many of them were based on the same universal principles common to all life.
This is why the Christ, the divine Son, or solar hero, was born at the winter solstice, and died and resurrected at the spring equinox in sacred myths throughout the world. The Christ is not unique to Christianity Jesus portrayed the work of the Christ in his life, just as Osiris, Krishna, Hu, Mithras, and Tammuz did hundreds and thousands of years earlier, and Quetzalcoatl and Hun Hunahpu did vast distances away. The correlation between the process of enlightenment and the movements of the cosmos is no coincidence, but part of the greater design of the universe, revealing the process of spiritual awakening to humanity.
In times now lost, different groups of people understood this profound teaching and message that literally comes from above, and knew that the outer drama enacted in the heavens was actually an inner representation of a human becoming spiritual, with the sun representing the spiritual force that merges with a person. For those who partake in the process of enlightenment, the sun is shown in dreams and out-of-body experiences in this spiritual context.
The sun worship of the past in the more advanced societies was really the worship of the spiritual sun, not the physical sun.
Osiris, Jesus, Krishna, and many other great spiritual figures throughout history, have identified themselves with the sun and its fire and light, as the divine Son, and as the source from which all creation came forth indicating the connection between their incredibly profound spiritual teachings, and the sun, stars, and cosmos.
Thou shinest in the horizon, thou sendest forth thy light into the darkness, thou
makest the darkness light with thy double plume, and thou floodest the world with light like the Disk at break of day. Thy diadem pierceth heaven and becometh a brother unto the stars, O thou form of every god.
~ Hymn to Osiris, The Egyptian Book of the Dead
That light of the sun which illumines the whole universe, which is present in the moon and in fire likewise know that splendour to be Mine.
~ Krishna, The Bhagavad Gita
It is I who am the light which is above them all. It is I who am the all. From me did the all come forth, and unto me did the all extend.
~ Jesus, The Book of Thomas the Contender from the Nag Hammadi Library
After six days Jesus took with him Peter, James and John the brother of James, and led them up a high mountain by themselves. There he was transfigured before them.
His face shone like the sun, and his clothes became as white as the light.
~ Matthew 17:1-2, The Bible
A European scholar wrote of the Druids that they followed the pure worship of the great luminary [the sun], the visible agent of a great invisible first cause.
Paracelsus, the great alchemist of the Middle Ages, wrote:
There is an earthly sun, which is the cause of all heat, and all who are able to see may see the sun; and those who are blind and cannot see him may feel his heat. There is an Eternal Sun, which is the source of all wisdom, and those whose spiritual senses have awakened to life will see that sun and be conscious of His existence;
but those who have not attained spiritual consciousness may yet feel His power by an inner faculty which is called Intuition.
~ Paracelsus
The physical sun is a blazing fire it gives light and life to all things physical. From the physical sun, all creation comes into being. Literally, science theorizes that all matter burst forth from the "Big Bang,"
from within the fiery furnace of the stars.
But life is multi-dimensional. Mystics have known this throughout time that there is more to our world than what we perceive with our five senses. With improvements in technology, there are now huge numbers of compelling accounts of life beyond the physical body in other dimensions from near-death experiences, reported by people all over the world; and these numbers are increasing rapidly by the day.
Even scientists are theorizing about the existence of multiple dimensions from the behavior of particles existing in multiple places at the same time (in the field of quantum physics).
Because the universe is multi-dimensional, creation also happens in higher dimensions; the creation from the Big Bang that we see here and now is only the three-dimensional manifestation of it. In Taoist texts, creation is described as moving from the subtle and unseen realms (which are higher dimensional), into physical manifestation. The source of these subtle energies is said to be the stars, and the sun is the star with which we share our closest relationship.
Trees and animals, humans and insects, flowers and birds: These are active images of the subtle energies that flow from the stars throughout the universe. Meeting and combining with each other and the elements of the earth, they give rise to all living things.
~ The Hua Hu Ching
The sun that exists in the physical world as the fire we see in the sky also exists in the higher dimensions as a spiritual fire and the spiritual source of all creation, which is why there is an overlap in
accounts of creation in spiritual cultures between natural and supernatural phenomenon. The natural phenomenon is the physical, tangible manifestation of the supernatural phenomenon. This is why we see spiritual cultures throughout the world venerating the sun they knew of its supreme, spiritual side.
In the ancient text the Pistis Sophia, Jesus speaks of the multi-dimensional nature of the sun:
For the light of the sun in its shape in truth is not in this world, for its light pierceth through many veils and regions.
~ Jesus in the Pistis Sophia
Manly P. Hall writes in his extensive study of the esoteric teachings of the world:
In the majority of cases, the religions of antiquity agree that the material visible sun was a reflector rather than a source of power. The sun was sometimes represented as a shield carried on the arm of the Sun God, as for example, Frey, the Scandinavian Solar Deity. This sun reflected the light of the invisible spiritual sun, which was the true source of life, light, and truth. The physical nature of the universe is receptive; it is a realm of effects. The invisible causes of these effects belong to the spiritual world. Hence, the spiritual world is the sphere of causation; the material world is the sphere of effects; while the intellectual or soul world is the sphere of mediation. Thus Christ, the personified higher intellect and soul nature, is called the Mediator who, by virtue of His position and power, says: No man cometh to the Father, but by me.
~ Manly P. Hall, The Secret Teachings of All Ages
The Ancient and Timeless Solar Spirituality
This understanding of creation has existed since ancient times. Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita refers to an ancient Sun dynasty whose knowledge was given to Manu, the Noah of the Hindus, and passed to the divine kings of the new age after a flood destroyed the previous civilization, but which was eventually lost. This is a reference to the sun worship of the Atlanteans and its passing to the beginnings of the current human age. The ancient Egyptians who had connections to Atlantis had a solar religion, which the mystical group the Essenes were said to be the inheritors of. The Essenes had a sun temple, conducted prayers to the sun, and called themselves the Children of Light. Jesus was said to have spent time with the Essenes and the events of his life followed the solar year (i.e. he was born on the winter solstice, John was killed at the autumn equinox, Jesus was crucified at the spring equinox).
The imperishable philosophy I taught to Viwaswana, the founder of the Sun dynasty, Viwaswana gave it to Manu the Lawgiver, and Manu to King Ikshwaku! The Divine Kings knew it, for it was their tradition. Then, after a long time, at last it was forgotten. It is the same ancient Path that I have now revealed to thee, since thou art My devotee and My friend. It is the supreme Secret...Whenever spirituality decays and materialism is rampant, then O Arjuna, I reincarnate Myself! To protect the righteous, to destroy the wicked and to establish the kingdom of God, I am reborn from age to age.
~ Krishna, The Bhagavad Gita
Manly P. Hall writes that sun worship originated from Atlantis:
Sun worship played an important part in nearly all the early pagan Mysteries.
This indicates the probability of their Atlantean origin, for the people of Atlantis were sun worshipers. The Solar Deity was usually personified as a beautiful youth, with long golden hair to symbolize the rays of the sun. This golden Sun God was slain by wicked ruffians, who personified the evil principle of the universe. By means of
certain rituals and ceremonies, symbolic of purification and regeneration, this wonderful God of Good was brought back to life and became the Savior of His
people. The secret processes whereby He was resurrected symbolized those cultures by means of which man is able to overcome his lower nature, master his appetites, and give expression to the higher side of himself. The Mysteries were organized for the purpose of assisting the struggling human creature to reawaken the spiritual powers which, surrounded by the flaming ring of lust and degeneracy, lay asleep within his soul. In other words, man was offered a way by which he could regain his lost estate.
~ Manly P. Hall, The Secret Teachings of All Ages
There are thousands of ancient sites aligned to the solstices and equinoxes, some of the most famous sacred texts encode solar events and venerate the sun, and supreme deities in many ancient spiritual teachings are associated with the sun and its attributes. Both the Druids and mystery schools of Greece conducted their initiation rituals and mysteries on the equinoxes and solstices. Throughout the world we see evidence of an ancient solar religion that was not specific to any culture or place, and that is timeless and universal.
This is why so many ancient cultures, such as the Essenes, Hindus, Sumerians, Egyptians, the Indians of North and Central America, the Inca and the Maya, all referred to themselves as the Children of the Sun or Children of Light.
While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light.
~ Jesus, John 12:36 from the Bible
Krishna, is the famous text The Bhavagad Gita, actually refers to the path of the sun the path of enlightenment, which takes one to the Supreme Primeval Abode beyond birth and death, as being related to the summer solstice, also saying that this path has always existed. Here, in this famous Hindu text, again
we find references to the ancient and timeless solar religion.
Now I will tell thee, O Arjuna, of the times which, if the mystics go forth, they do not return, and at which they go forth only to return. If knowing the Supreme Spirit the sage goes forth with fire and light, in the daytime, in the fortnight of the waxing moon and in the six months before the Northern summer solstice, he will attain the Supreme.
But if he departs in gloom, at night, during the fortnight of the waning moon and in the six months before the Southern solstice [winter solstice], then he reaches but lunar light and he will be born again. These bright and dark paths out of the world have always existed. Whoso takes the former, returns not; he who chooses the latter, returns. The sage who knows this passes beyond all merit that comes from the study of the scriptures, from sacrifice, from austerities and charity, and reaches the Supreme Primeval Abode.
~ Krishna, The Bhavagad Gita
These same paths in and out of the world, connected to the winter and summer solstice can be found in Mithraism. An author describes the design of the secret caves of Mithras as follows:
"But this cave was adorned with the signs of the zodiac, Cancer and Capricorn. The summer and winter solstices were chiefly conspicuous, as the gates of souls descending into this life, or passing out of it in their ascent to the Gods; Cancer being the gate of descent, and Capricorn of ascent. These are the two avenues of the immortals passing up and down from earth to heaven, and from heaven to earth."
~ John P. Lundy, Monumental Christianity
The Cosmic Son
Symbolized by the sun, the Son/Christ is present in many ancient spiritual practices where people were in touch with the divine, given different names, but naturally having key aspects in common. Jesus is known as the Christ, but Christ is more than a name. It s the same cosmic Son, Horus, Quetzalcoatl, Mithras, Krishna, Odin/Balder, Hu, Dionysus, Attis the light and savior of the world. This universal cosmic principle has been celebrated and expressed according to culture, but with many similarities.
As just one example, these deities all have the same birthday, which is the date of the winter solstice.
This is because the cosmic Son has been allegorized as or has actually been present many times within different people, each who have represented the same kinds of events in their lives based on the same spiritual principles. Even today, many people still continue to celebrate the birthday of these deities at the time of the winter solstice. The birth of Mithras is celebrated in Persia as Yalda, in Germany Yule is celebrated in connection with Odin, and the birth of Jesus as Christmas.
In the West there were many traditions which the Romans called pagan and suppressed as Christianity took hold, but Christianity itself has many similarities with those pagan traditions, which also appear in many other cultures.
People argue that the winter solstice was a pagan tradition which was simply used by the Church as Christ s birthday and that the celebration actually has nothing to do with Christ, and even that Christians adapted pagan myths and symbols to create the story of Jesus life. Others argue that the pagan people of Europe were simple people whose celebration was little more than a form of nature worship. But both ignore the role of the cosmic Son and the many universal principles contained in their religion's forms.
The solstices and equinoxes are a celebration of the universal cosmic Son, which has expressed itself through various ancient religions but belongs exclusively to none.
The Path to Enlightenment
The divine son as Horus (photo copyright wiki user Rama).
Some believe that the correlation of heavenly movements to the lives of different deities only indicates that different religions borrowed from one another, basing their stories on the pagan traditions of sun worship. But to mystics, this correlation is the result of something hidden and profound that is central to all authentic spirituality the path to enlightenment.
This path is one that is mirrored in the heavens with the movements of the celestial bodies and is found imbued in very fabric of life. It has been enacted by "Christified" humans throughout time, and takes place within a spiritually prepared person. It is the basis of the work of awakening, and at the solstices and equinoxes ancient people celebrated its stages in tune with the natural rhythms of the sun and seasons, which are permeated by its principles.
This intrinsic relationship between the principles of life and spirituality is one of the reasons why so many ancient sacred sites, texts, and celebrations combined spiritual and natural phenomena. They can be read in the world around us just as they were by ancient spiritual peoples, as they are timeless and ever-present.
Around three days following the summer solstice, the sun begins to descend in the sky, and darkness begins to increase as the nights begin to lengthen toward winter. This symbolizes the consciousness, the eternal spark of light within each person, the seed of inner potential, coming out from the divine source and descending into the darkness of matter and the material world (from heaven to earth), to learn and awaken through the process of life like the seed which is produced from the tree at summer. On a personal spiritual level it also symbolizes the beginning of a new journey on the path to enlightenment.
At the autumn equinox, day and night are equal, but from the autumn equinox onward there is more darkness than light this is the time of inner death, and the descent into the underworld to face and overcome one's own inner darkness in preparation for the birth of the spiritual Son/sun within. Many deities descended into the underworld/Hades/hell at this time of year, as the seed of inner potential remains dormant indefinitely, and does not germinate, unless it goes into the earth and dies. As the course of the sun throughout the year can also be found in its course through one day, the autumn equinox corresponds to the time of sunset.
At the winter solstice, darkness is at its maximum, but there is hope in the winter sunrise from which the light gradually increases this is the time of the birth of the spiritual Son/sun within, and why so many solar deities were born at the winter solstice, including Jesus. The winter solstice finds its parallel to the time of midnight, from which the sun will begin its return toward morning, and why Christmas mass was held at midnight. The divine Son starts as something small like a child and grows within just as the sun at winter and seed beneath the ground toward the summer solstice, transforming someone spiritually as it does.
At the spring equinox day and night are once again equal, but from this time onward light is greater than darkness, just as it is from sunrise each morning this is the time of inner crucifixion and death, resurrection, the triumph over darkness, and attainment of eternal spiritual life, and why so many deities die and later come back to life to live eternally at this time, such as Jesus, Osiris, and the Mayan Hun Hunahpu, and the life of spring bursts forth to defeat the forces of darkness and death in the light of the triumphant sun.
At the summer solstice, the sun has ascended to its highest point in the sky and the light is at its greatest symbolizing enlightenment and awakening this is the time of the ascension from earth to heaven, the return to wholeness of Being and the divine source from which consciousness originated. Like the flowers and fruits of summer, this is the time when the life of the spirit is at full bloom and corresponds to midday in the sun s daily journey. From the ending of the summer solstice, the sun descends once more to begin the eternal cycle again.
Those who incarnated the Son, and had the role of savior in the world, enacted these events in their lives to show the process of awakening, and those who do the spiritual work will go through these same events in their lives as part of this process. It is a process that does not belong to any religion, to any deity, but is so universal that it has taken place within many men and women throughout history, and is continuously repeated in the cycles of the sun.
Spiritual Symbols Found in the Cosmos
Some of the world's most ancient and well known spiritual symbols also encode universal spiritual principles that are not specific to any religion. This is why many of the same or similar symbols appear throughout the world. They reveal that there is a common spiritual knowledge which people have tapped into and have then expressed according to their environment and cultures, forming different religions and traditions that were actually founded on the same eternal and universal spirituality.
Symbols operate on many different levels, only being able to be interpreted according to the understanding of the observer. If we understand something, it can become apparently visible in the symbol, but that which is out of our reach will remain hidden.
While many of us will be familiar with the symbols below, most will be unaware of what these symbols describe. The examples below reveal how symbols can actually describe universal principles that operate on many different levels. These symbols encode information about the movement of the earth through the heavens, yet at the same time, also reveal how those universal principles operate within the human psyche.
This is why the great maxim of wisdom states, "as above, so below." These symbols reveal how physical, cosmic phenomena are related to inner, spiritual ones, and why the progress of the sun throughout the year was so important to ancient spiritual cultures. We are connected to creation in ways we cannot possibly imagine.
Yin and Yang
The ancient Chinese symbol of the yin and yang can actually be seen when mapping the cycles of light and darkness during the rotation of the earth around the sun.
Ancient Chinese yin and yang symbol.
The ancient Chinese symbol of the yin and yang as found in mapping out the cycles of light and darkness throughout the year.
Swastika
The swastika is one of the most universal symbols, examples of which can be found in numerous cultures of the ancient world. It illustrates a cosmic principle of movement which can be found in the relationship between the planets and the sun, and can even be seen in the slow spin of a galaxy. The four arms can symbolize the four points of the year the solstices and equinoxes.
An ancient bowl dated to 4,000 BC discovered in Iraq which shows a swastika and illustrates forces and movements (photo copyright wiki user Dbachmann).
The same swastika concept found in the art of the North American Indians (photo copyright Herb Roe, 2007) The Precession of the Equinoxes as it is seen on the plane of Ecliptic from the North Pole. This movement can be illustrated by a swastika (read here for a more detailed explanation).
Spiral
The spiral is often found in the spiritual symbology of the ancient Europeans and Britons. At the ancient site of Newgrange in Ireland, the light of the rising sun on the winter solstice enters its innermost chamber.
This ancient site is decorated with the symbol of the spiral. While we often think of our earth's rotational movement around the sun as being in an ellipse on a flat plane, a new theory has been put forth that it is really rotating in a spiral as the sun itself moves at great speed throughout the galaxy (at 450,000 miles per hour) in its own rotation around a greater sun dragging the planets of the solar system with it in a great whirling spiral.
The entrance stone to the ancient megalithic temple of Newgrange, which aligns to the winter solstice sunrise. It is covered in the symbol of the spiral (photo copyright wiki user Maksim, 2006).
An illustration of the spiralling rotation of the planets of our solar system around the sun as it moves through the galaxy at great speed, which is also illustrated in this video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0jHsq36_NTU.
The Pentagram
The symbol of the pentagram is found in pagan spirituality throughout Europe. When pointing upward, it is a symbol of light forces, and when pointing downward, dark forces. The planet Venus actually draws a pentagram in its orbit around the sun in its relation to the Earth every eight years.
The symbol of the pentagram (image copyright - originally uploaded 2007 by wiki user Melian; modified by KovacsUr and Fibonacci; renamed by Nyo).
The positions of Venus at its lower conjunctions with Earth between the two transits of 2004 and 2012. Venus' orbit as viewed from Earth assumes an approximate "pentagram" shape, due to the approximate 13:8 ratio between the orbital periods of Earth and Venus (image copyright wiki user CWitte, 2007).
These videos also illustrate the motion of Venus around Earth and the pentagram it creates:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YbsngxAEbHs
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4cgQNUhtmHM
The Churning of the Milky Ocean
The Churning of the Milky Ocean is an ancient Hindu teaching which was carved into a mural at the ancient site of Angkor Wat in Cambodia, which itself aligns to the spring equinox.
In this mural it symbolizes the cycles of light and darkness throughout the year, rotating upon the equinox, with the winter solstice at the darkest extreme, and the summer solstice the lightest. Numbers of the annual cycle were encoded into the mural, as well as those of a greater cosmic cycle known as The Great Year or the precssion of the equinoxes.
A painting of the famous Hindu teaching called The Churning of the Milky Ocean. Those at the ancient site of Angkor Wat knew how it related to the progress of our earth around the sun in its annual cycle, but also to even greater cosmic cycles.
Our solar system, and earth, cross the galactic plane over very long periods of time in cyclical movements, as if they are pulled back and forth across a central point in a movement much like that depicted in the Churning of the Milky Ocean, also illustrated in this video:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k6_2SYWgcQI
Remnants of Solstice and Equinox Celebrations from Ancient Times
The Great Sphinx of Egypt gazes precisely at the rising sun on the equinox.
Thousands of years ago highly advanced ancient peoples built huge megalithic structures and temples that aligned with the sun at the equinoxes and solstices, some such as the Great Pyramids, Angkor Wat, and Easter Island even align with each other from across the world. Some traditions of celebrating the solstice and equinox still survive today, although many others passed into history.
While traditions often change their shape or lose their meaning through time, these stone monuments have withstood thousands of years. They were purposefully built as giant symbols and thus have kept a knowledge of the process of enlightenment, and greater spiritual significance of the solstice and equinox, encoded into their structures for us to still read today.
Here are just some of the ancient markers built by different cultures that recognize the solstices and equinoxes:
The first rays of the rising sun on the summer solstice pass through stone markers to hit the altar stone in the center of Stonehenge in England.
Newgrange in Ireland is a giant one acre mound which receives a shaft of sunlight into a central
chamber shaped like a crucifix at dawn on the winter solstice.
At the ancient city of Angkor Wat in Cambodia, the spire of its central tower aligns with the sun on the equinox, and surrounding temples align with the stars of the constellation of Draco.
The Great Sphinx of Egypt gazes precisely at the equinox sunrise.
A giant serpent mound in Ohio in the United States faces the summer solstice sunset.
On Easter Island, seven of the giant stone statues called maoi face the equinox sunset, while on another part of the island, fifteen face the summer solstice sunset.
The sun dagger built by the Pueblo Indians in Chaco Canyon in the United States is a stone structure which uses shadow and sunlight to mark the equinoxes and solstices. The ancient city at Chaco Canyon also has various alignments to the solstices and equinoxes.
In South America, in the ancient Mayan city of Tikal, the pyramid shaped temples align with the highest mountain peak in the area at the winter solstice sunrise, and the temples align with each other to mark the equinoxes and solstices.
On the equinox at the pyramid of Chichen Itza in Mexico, the light creates the effect of the feathered serpent slithering down the side of the pyramid.
Two of the thirty caves at Ajanta in India capture the sunlight on the solstices so that the sacred statues of Buddha they contain are illuminated.
A number of temples in Egypt are aligned with the winter solstice sunrise. At the temple of Amun in Karnak, the sun s rays are funneled along a giant temple causeway lined with massive pillars,
flooding an inner sanctuary of Amun with light. This page includes some stunning photos of the
solstice sunrise at Karnak.
Sites Dedicated to Spiritual Connection
An understanding of the symbols used in these ancient sites reveals that many were representing the same spiritual process around the same cosmic events. They indicate the existence of a cosmic spirituality,
which could be described as an ancient solar religion, shared by peoples separated by vast distances and time who tapped into the same universal knowledge and understanding, perhaps even through other-worldly contact and influences.
The knowledge encoded into their designs tells us that what happens above is related to our world below, and most importantly, to ourselves. They show the great link between the human and divine, the personal and the cosmic, and were centered around the process of awakening.
Over time their knowledge became distorted and lost as they were infiltrated by dark forces, and people degenerated; when this happens civilizations are no longer able to hold themselves together, having turned on the very principles that allow them to do so, and thus they fall into barbarism and ruin.
What were originally spiritual celebrations, either degenerated or were inverted to include human and animal sacrifice and all manner of debauchery, such as found in the mad parties of Sol Invictus in Rome and the blood revelry of the Aztecs. This degeneration, which happened in some cases over hundreds to thousands of years to different cultures, has in many instances associated the solstices and equinoxes with the worst of human behavior.
However, looking back today with the same shared knowledge as the original esoteric builders, one can recognize the knowledge of universal spirituality in their ruins and preserved texts, which preceded and survived the degeneration allowing someone with esoteric experience and knowledge to understand ancient mysteries where archaeologists and academics remain baffled.
People often wonder why the ancient builders went to such lengths to create such incredible structures. What many fail to recognize is how they understood that spirituality and the attainment of enlightenment was the most important thing in life, and why genuinely esoteric cultures centered around this rather than the pursuit of pleasure, wars, material wealth, etc.
Despite the passing of these ancient cultures into history, this knowledge is never truly lost, as it is palpitating throughout the whole of the universe for those who choose to search for it.
Cosmic Connections
Hieroglyphs carved into the temple of Seti I at Abydos in Egypt which look like advanced vehicles/craft.
The knowledge encoded in ancient sacred sites and texts is not just shared on a planetary level, but also on a cosmic one, as however different its cultural expressions may seem, its knowledge is that of the universal principles governing all of creation and is shared even by inhabitants of other planets and solar systems.
Many spiritual principles and symbols we are familiar with have been found integrated into the unique geometric designs of crop circles, and interactions with extra-terrestrials have revealed they are deeply spiritual beings. The crashed extra-terrestrial vehicle from the famous Roswell incident was described by witnesses as being inscribed with markings reminiscent of Egyptian hieroglyphs, and the temple of Seti I discovered in Egypt has hieroglyphs that look like extra-terrestrial vehicles.
Many of the ancient sites that align to the solstices and equinoxes also align with each other, lying along the same line that runs around the earth (although they are separated by vast distances and are located in some of the most remote places on earth). These sites include the Great Pyramids of Egypt, Easter Island, the Nazca Lines in Peru, and the temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia. Some of these sites are even located at numerologically symbolic degrees from one another. For example, Angkor Wat is situated longitude 72° east of the Great Pyramids and 72 is a number key to the slow astrological cycle our earth progresses through called the precession of the equinox, which both sites encode in their designs. The Great Pyramid of Egypt also encodes the speed of light, among many other incredible
dimensions related to our planet.
The extraordinary knowledge contained in these sites of the earth s proportions and its astrological cycles reveals that there was a highly advanced input into their designs that combined deep spiritual knowledge with that of the cosmos, which has so far remains unexplained by the traditional model of human history.
Connect with the Heavens and the Earth by Celebrating the Solstices and Equinoxes Solstices and equinoxes are a time of connection between the heavens and the earth, the personal and the divine, the inner and the outer, the material and the spiritual, and even a time when contact through mystical experiences is made more possible. It is a beautiful time, which unfortunately we as a humanity have lost touch with, as did other cultures who degenerated in the past and lost their spiritual foundation.
By taking part in ceremonies to celebrate the solstices and equinoxes, one is able to use the event for its higher purpose just as the ancients did to connect with the divine, to understand cosmic, eternal
principles through intuitive experience and the cycles of nature, and to take the spiritual nourishment needed to help toward awakening. This is not simply the revival of something past, but the partaking in something eternal that permeates our lives, even if we pay little attention to it.
The whole of creation has been formed to imbue the principles of spirituality, and thus these principles can not only be found all around us, but also within us, allowing us to understand our origins and the true purpose of life whenever we choose to look. This has allowed different peoples, throughout the world and time, to each be able to tap into the same universal spiritual knowledge.
In everything that is life is the law written. You find it in the grass, in the tree, in the river, in the mountain, in the birds of heaven, in the fishes of the sea; but seek it chiefly in yourselves. For I tell you truly, all living things are nearer to God than the scripture which is without life. God so made life and all living things that they might by the everlasting word teach the laws of the true God to man. God wrote not the laws in the pages of books, but in your heart and in your spirit. They are in your breath, your blood, your bone; in your flesh, your bowels, your eyes, your ears, and in every little part of your body. They are present in the air, in the water, in the earth, in the plants, in the sunbeams, in the depths and in the heights. They all speak to you that you may understand the tongue and the will of the living God. But you shut your eyes that you may not see, and you shut your ears that you may not hear. I tell you truly, that the scripture is the work of man, but life and all its hosts are the work of our God.
Wherefore do you not listen to the words of God which are written in His works? And wherefore do you study the dead scriptures which are the work of the hands of men?
~ Jesus in The Essene Gospel of Peace
The message of the spiritual sun transcends both time and culture and forms a cosmic book for all who can read it.
AUTUMN EQUINOX
The Descent into Inner Darkness
CHAPTER TWO
The Spiritual Meaning of the Autumn Equinox
The path of the sun, symbolizing the journey to enlightenment, starts as darkness begins to increase, three days after the summer solstice. This is when the sun begins its journey south in its progress through the sky after having reached its most northerly apex at the summer solstice, and the days begin to shorten toward the cold and darkness of winter.
The descent of the sun south into darkness is symbolic of the consciousness coming into the darkness of matter, of the spirit coming into a body, into the darkness of the subconscious of the psyche, to join the process of life (called the Wheel of Life in Buddhism). This darkness is necessary for spiritual awakening, as without darkness we would not know light, and it is from darkness (the subconscious) that light (consciousness) is extracted, with the knowledge gained from experience.
In the beginning of creation this unique spark of the spirit comes down into matter to learn from life in the world of duality between darkness and light. Experience, learning, and suffering, propel it in a quest to return to the divine source from which it first emanated: from darkness, to the birth of light at the winter solstice, culminating at the summer solstice, when the light is at its maximum, symbolizing enlightenment.
After the sun s descent following the summer solstice, the next stage in the sun s journey is the autumn equinox.
The autumn equinox is a mysterious time. It marks an essential passage in the process of enlightenment that is often overlooked, misunderstood, and mistaken as dark and heretical.
It is the time of balance between day and night, before night takes over and brings the coming winter, a
time of darkness and death. This duality between light and dark exists within humanity, and in the work of spiritual transformation. All things must die before they can be born, all spiritual ascent requires descent first, and all those who long for light must firstly face their own inner darkness and overcome it. The autumn equinox symbolizes a stage of inner preparation in the process of enlightenment to make way for the Son to be born within at the winter solstice.
Remnants of the esoteric meaning of the autumn equinox can barely be found in lasting traditions from the times of ancient peoples who celebrated it and knew of its real significance. To discover the esoteric meaning by looking at rituals and traditions is not easy. There are many traditions which have been passed down today, but these have strayed from their root meanings. Different civilizations and cultures have added their own veneer, altering and losing much of the meaning as they themselves lost the knowledge of it.
Its meaning has been obscured with time, much more than the other three events in the wheel of the year. As the understanding of spiritual knowledge was lost, its meaning became vague and must have seemed to represent sinister, evil forces. Thus the symbols were given other meanings and turned into other things in the way that Santa Claus symbolizes Christmas day.
Parts of autumn equinox celebrations moved to cross quarter days (cross quarter days are produced when the wheel of the year is divided into eight instead of four; these days are called Samhain, Beltane etc. in Paganism) and meanings changed into celebrations of the dead, of evil spirits, harvest festivals, bonfires, sacrifices, drunkenness, and debauchery.
So you have to start with a knowledge of the process of enlightenment, to have a basis upon which you can search and piece together the jigsaw. Fortunately the builders of ancient sites such as the Great Pyramids left the message of the real meaning in their architecture, which mirrored the meanings found in the cosmos and survived in sketchy details through myths, legends, and religions throughout history.
What Is the Autumn Equinox?
Equinoxes occur twice a year in spring and autumn when night and day are approximately equal lengths, which is when the sun crosses the equator.
The symbol of the star sign of Libra.
Interestingly, in the northern hemisphere, the sun enters the astrological sign of Libra at the autumn equinox, which is the sign of the scales and of balance. The glyph for Libra represents the sun setting/rising, expressing the balance between night and day.
The autumn equinox heralds a time of growing darkness, as after it the sun continues to descend and diminish (as it has since the summer solstice) so that the nights are longer than the days, and increasingly so, bringing the change of seasons and the cold and death of winter.
The Spiritual Meaning of the Autumn Equinox
Traditionally, the autumn equinox is a celebration of the harvest, as it is when summer has finished giving its fruits, which are collected in preparation for winter. But there are other indicators given by the most ancient sacred sites that mark the autumn equinox: a descending passage into a subterranean pit lit by a star of the dragon constellation in the Great Pyramid of Egypt, a seven-scaled feathered serpent of light descending a giant pyramid in Mexico, a giant Pyramid of the Sun aligned to the equinoxes built on a cave symbolizing the underworld, and even giant statues facing the sunset that leads to growing darkness on
Easter Island.
What was known to the ancients is the part darkness plays in the work of spiritual transformation.
Those in the orthodox superstitiously fear it, and many in the new age completely ignore it. But at the autumn equinox it can be found in the cycles of nature, and the alignment of our planet and traces of it can be found here and there in ancient legends and myths that have become distorted over time.
Christ and Lucifer
An Egyptian adornment worn over the chest which shows the duality between the rival gods Horus on one side (the god of light), and Seth on the other (the god of darkness), amidst other symbols.
In the pagan cultures of Europe the sun god has two aspects. One is the god of light, the day, and the other is his twin rival, the god of darkness, the night. They are Gawain and the Green Knight, Gwyn and Gwythyr, Llew and Goronwy, Lugh and Balor, Balan and Balin, the Oak King and the Holly King, etc.
The god of light is born three days after the winter solstice as the divine Son in traditions around the world (including the birth of Jesus as Christmas), as the sun, having reached its lowest and weakest point, begins to ascend and gain strength. The god of darkness, however, is born three days after the summer
solstice, as this is when the sun begins to descend and weaken while the nights and darkness begins to grow.
Through his life, Jesus enacted the symbolic events that occur in the process of enlightenment.
Although also enacted by many others, their accounts have become either lost or distorted over time, and so it is the account of Jesus life which is the most modern and clearest reference (however, Christian texts have also been heavily suppressed and tampered with by the Orthodoxy).
In Christian esotericism the Son/Christ has a shadow, which is Lucifer, just as in ancient Egypt the god Seth was the dark antithesis of the Egyptian Son Horus. In Aztec mythology the Son is Quetzalcoatl and he has a twin brother called Xolotl who was the dark aspect of Venus as the evening star, whilst Quetzalcoatl was Venus as the morning star. When drawing parallels to pagan myths, Christ is the god of light, and Lucifer the god of darkness.
Some have confused John the Baptist, whose birthday is celebrated on June 24th (three days after the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere) as the god of darkness. John however, has a different role.
He is both the Avatar, the prophet who always announces the coming of the Christ in darkness before the light comes, and also the initiate, the one who does the work of spiritual transformation.
Symbolically Lucifer holds a set of scales, representing balance and justice. The scales also represent the equinox, a time of balance between night and day, which occurs as the Earth passes into the constellation of Libra, which is also symbolized by a set of scales.
Although the subject of superstition for millions of people, the concepts we have of the Devil and Satan are creations of the orthodoxy they do not exist as such, although darkness and evil forces do.
These figures at one or other times were possibly meant to represent Lucifer, or were confused with him, but it is only Lucifer who really exists, and Lucifer is very different from the hierarchy of demons, none of which are the devil, Satan or Lucifer.
Misunderstood and demonized by the orthodoxy, Lucifer in most people's minds is a figure of evil, but his true role is a spiritual one which is necessary for someone's awakening. He is the shadow of Christ/the Son who tempts the initiate, and whose temptations must be overcome to awaken. At this stage in the process of enlightenment, the initiate is subject to Lucifer, the tempter, and must defeat him to reach
the light.
This anonymous painting from the sixth century in one of the oldest Christian monasteries in the world located in the Egyptian desert of Sinai, and the oldest depiction of Christ as "the Ruler of All," shows Jesus face with a dual nature. Some speculate this is to show both his divine and human nature, but could the more "luciferic" left half actually reflect Lucifer, who on his side holds the book of wisdom, and Christ's side peace?
Without darkness there would be no shadow, and it is shadow that allows us to see just as much as light does. Without shadow we could not see form, and there would be no recognition that light even exists.
In the work of spiritual transformation, light is extracted from darkness. The subconscious, which is given by nature, is the darkness, and in the process of awakening the light of consciousness is extracted
from it, gradually increasing consciousness within a person until there is total light. This consciousness once extracted, then contains the knowledge of light, but also the knowledge of darkness, which has been referred to as the knowledge of good and evil. This is how true knowledge, wisdom, and love are attained, and why Lucifer esoterically is known as the light-bearer. Each person starts in the darkness of the subconscious, and then must go through much learning and suffering in their life to understand and be able to overcome it, and through a spiritual process destroy it to become the light with the knowledge of that light and the darkness that contained it.
The Seed and the Wicker Man: A Time of Death and Sacrifice
The mystic starts from where they are, which is in the darkness of the subconscious and world of matter, and why John is born when darkness begins to increase in the sun s annual cycle, and light decrease. The Son/Christ is the spiritual force which is born within an initiate once they are spiritually prepared enough, symbolically celebrated at the winter solstice when the light begins to increase in the solar cycle, and darkness decrease. As the Son, the light of the spiritual within symbolized as the sun, grows and increases, the darkness of the egos and the subconscious of the initiate, represented by John, must decrease. This reference is found in the Gospels:
A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven. Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled. He must increase, but I must decrease. He that cometh from above is above all: he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: he that cometh from heaven is above all.
~ John 3: 27-31, The Bible
The burning of the wicker man, said to have been done by the ancient Celts at the autumn equinox (photo copyright Simon Brooke).
In Celtic traditions, which still survive today, the autumn equinox is a time of sacrifice; they made a figure from the stems of grain, which they sacrificed by fire. In England they burnt a wicker figure made of barley stems representing John Barleycorn, the spirit of the fields, as it is said that he must die in order to become a man. The one who walks the path must die inwardly to make way for the spiritual Son/Christ.
This death is an inner one, which represents the death of the egos and darkness of the subconscious.
John the Baptist is said to have died six months before Jesus whose death was at the time of the spring equinox, making John's death at the time of the autumn equinox. The autumn equinox is a time of death, as
just as in nature at this time of year the seed must die before it can grow, so too must the subconscious and the egos die to make way for the life of the Son within, celebrated at the winter solstice.
Within the death of the seed at autumn can be found the symbol of the mercurial seed, which is the latent creative spiritual potential within a human being. This seed of spiritual potential is contained within the sexual energies, as the sexual energies contain life and the forces of creation.
Mercury transformed converts the elements of nature into divine fire, which is the kundalini the awakened power of the goddess Shakti, the Mother. The eternal feminine principle of the Mother works within the sexual energies (symbolized as mercury) and the divine alchemical fire to put to death the egos (the darkness within), and give birth to the spiritual. This practice has been referred to as Tantrism in the East, medieval alchemy in Europe, the practice of HeQi in Taoism, and the bridal chamber of the esoteric Christians.
Through the alchemical process, light is extracted from darkness and the initiate is born again" not of flesh, but of the spirit. For this, the sexual energies need to be purified. As the egos, and darkness within, are destroyed, the initiate s energies become increasingly cleansed and purified in preparation for the birth of the Son within. This is the baptism, the spiritual cleansing, of John the Baptist.
The sacred sexual seed was symbolized by wheat in the Eleusinian mysteries of ancient Greece. The third century theologian Hippolytus of Rome (similar to present-day anti-cult figures) writes about an ear of wheat being used in Athenian initiation ceremonies in his Refutation of All Heresies (5.8.39):
The Athenians, when they initiate in the Eleusinia, exhibit in silence to the epoptai the mighty and marvelous and most complete epoptic mystery, an ear of cut-wheat. But this ear of wheat is also considered among the Athenians to constitute the perfect enormous illumination that has descended from the ineffable one, just as the hierophant himself declares.
A queen of Eleusis offering a triune of wheat to the goddess Demeter from a vase dated to 340 BC.
In the Mayan account of creation, found in their sacred text called the Popol Vuh, humans were created from a mixture of ground corn (seed) and water. This corn was said to be found hidden in a sacred mountain, and was the bones of the buried remains of the Corn Goddess. This goddess of hidden potential is symbolic of the same kundalini energy, written about in Hindu texts, that lies latent within the coccyx of the human being.
Hidden under an immovable rock, which was split open by a strike of lightening, the corn got singed and became three other colors, making four in total: black, white, yellow, and red. These colors represent the change in the sexual energies that occurs in alchemy as they are purified (from black, to white, to yellow and then red), and can be shown to somebody in dreams or out of the body. When the energies turn red, the kundalini awakens.
In this Mayan account, the human being is the grain, the seed (which is the corn) of hidden potential,
whose energies can be transformed in alchemical fire (the lightening).
However, in the Popol Vuh humans were born into darkness (which is the darkness of the subconscious). It was not until the sun rose in the East from out of a cave that there was light and life.
Mithras, Jesus, and Viracocha were all said to have been born into a cave and Krishna into a prison. This is the birth of the spiritual Son/sun within, who brings the light and life of the spirit to the darkness of the human being.
The Descent into the Underworld, and the Law of the Fall
Looking down the descending passage of the Great Pyramid.
At the time of the autumn equinox, an ancient Welsh myth tells how Llew, the god of light, is killed and descends to the underworld where he becomes king of that realm while his shadow, the god of darkness,
dominates in the earthly world. Lucifer, the god of darkness, is the psychological trainer of the initiate in this time of learning.
In the Great Pyramid of Egypt there is a descending passage that leads to a subterranean pit. At midnight on the autumn equinox during certain time periods, a star associated with Lucifer shines down the descending passage into the pit. At the same time, the star of Alcyone, the principle star from the Pleiades constellation around which our own sun and solar system revolves, aligns with the meridian of the Pyramid. Here is a significant ancient clue to the meaning of the autumn equinox. It is before the birth of the god of light at the winter solstice that the initiate must descend into the underworld whilst subjected to the temptations of Lucifer to investigate their subconscious and overcome their egos.
The Abyss/hell/underworld, whilst being a place in the other dimensions which can be seen in out-of-body and in near-death experiences, is also connected to the human psyche. Hell has nine regions/layers.
Externally the nine layers of hell correspond to the nine interior regions of the subconscious, which interpenetrate in the present moment.
In ancient Babylon, in the autumn, Dumuzi (whose name means rightful son ) became the god who was sacrificed with the cutting of the corn. As the grain was cut and stored, the god was said to go into the underworld to return next year when the sap rose in the trees and vegetation returned to the earth.
His myth was paralleled in Akkadian lore by Tammuz, who died every year at the beginning of autumn, and was reborn in the spring.
Adonis ( Lord ) was worshiped by the Semitic peoples of Babylonia and Syria. Every year, when winter came, he had to descend to the underworld and live with its queen, the goddess Persephone.
In China there are terracotta figures buried beneath a pyramid; they are encased in mercury, symbolizing the alchemical mercury and the descent to the underworld.
The descent into the underworld is related to an esoteric law the law of the fall, where someone must first descend before they can ascend, and why ancient myths and monuments symbolize the descent into the underworld (down steps, descending passageways, into caves, etc.), and spiritual ascents (up flights of stairs, ascending passageways, at the apexes of pyramids, etc.). At the autumn equinox, the time of balance between night and day, before the growth of darkness, the initiate must arrive at balance and
from there descend.
One of the earliest known representations of the autumn equinox, a symbol of balance, found in an ancient megalithic site in Ireland.
The Numbers Seven, Eight, and Nine
John, the man in the wilderness, must make straight the way of the Lord to prepare for the coming of the Christ within, which is a process of spiritual purification in which the seven spiritual bodies must be created from the purified sexual energies, and the seven initiations passed. These seven spiritual bodies correspond to the seven dimensions, and will become the vehicles for the Christ/the Son. The wilderness is a symbol of the animalistic state of a person. All the anger, hatred, lust, pride, etc. of the psyche is of an animal, whereas the Son brings its spiritual nature to us.
The god Sokar who later became known as Osiris in Egypt beneath a mound with the seven serpents raised. These seven serpents correspond to the seven solar bodies. The cane he holds is a symbol of the risen kundalini.
On Easter Island there are seven statues that face the sunset on the autumn equinox. They represent the seven solar bodies that need to be created through alchemy (referred to as the "bodies of gold" in ancient Egyptian texts, and the "wedding garments" by Jesus) and the seven initiatic grades of fire that have to be attained before descending into the chaos of the underworld. In the secret initiatory schools of Mithrasim there were seven degrees of initiation. At the pyramid of Kukulcán (the feathered serpent) in Mexico, at the autumn equinox, a feathered serpent made of seven triangles of light descends the pyramid
symbolizing the seven bodies and initiations.
In their explanation of creation, the Mayans divided the underworld into nine layers/strata. Like the Mayans, Dante Alighieri s work The Divine Comedy assigned nine layers to hell (and nine regions to
heaven). At the autumn equinox at the pyramid of Kukulcán, the Mayans symbolize the descent of the serpent through the nine layers of the underworld as a serpent of light that descends the nine terraces of the pyramid.
Dante writes about the structure of heaven and hell in his work The Divine Comedy.
The ninth region of the underworld (called the ninth sphere) is the center of the earth, which is the place of earth s central fire. Likewise fire exists in the lower anatomy of a human, in the sexual organs. To work in the ninth sphere is an esoteric reference to working with the sacred sexual fire in alchemical, inner transformation.
Esoterically, at the center of the earth is the symbol of infinity as the holy eight, which is also a symbol of equalization or equinox. The forces upon and within a person revolve from this point both into superior regions (or heavens), and into inferior ones (hells); it is from here that the spiritual work proceeds.
The symbol for infinity (like the number 8 turned on its side). (image copyright wiki user "0buretka, 2012) The ninth sphere is also the womb in which the Son/Christ gestates. At autumn, the seeds produced at summer die and then begin to germinate beneath the earth; the descent into the nine layers of the underworld symbolizes the gestation of the Son in the womb of the earth over nine months, before being born at the winter solstice.
To descend requires alchemy. In descending the initiate climbs down Lucifer's ladder. After the descent, having completed a work of many trials and tests in the underworld, the initiate has to climb back up Lucifer's ladder, or Jacob's ladder, to ascend. There are nine regions of the underworld and nine heavens. The initiate must descend to the nine layers of the underworld to reach the nine heavens (and each layer of the underworld is suffering). We have to go through suffering to reach happiness. Scaling the heavens is how we get to the city of nine gates.
I [Peter] replied, asking him, What is the name of the place to which you go, your city? He [Jesus] said to me, This is the name of my city, Nine Gates. Let us praise God as we are mindful that the tenth is the head.
~ The Acts of Peter and the Twelve Apostles, from The Nag Hammadi Library
Mentally renouncing all actions, the self-controlled soul enjoys bliss in this body, the city of the nine gates, neither doing anything himself nor causing anything to be done.
~ Krishna, The Bhagavad Gita
The Warrior Aspect of the Goddess Found around the World
The Mother goddess in her role as a warrior has been illustrated by different cultures around the world with amazing similarities showing the universal nature of her existence and one of the parts she plays in creation, which has been associated with the autumn equinox since ancient times. In ancient Sumer, the goddess Inanna descends into the underworld at the time of the autumn equinox and in Greek mythology the goddess Persephone descends at the same time, before returning to the earth again at spring. In Egypt, the mother goddess Hathor was associated with the Milky Way during the third millennium BC when it aligned with where the sun rose and set during the autumn and spring equinoxes. Shortly after the autumn equinox, the Hindu festival of Durga Puja is celebrated in India, which is dedicated to the Mother of the Universe, the warrior goddess Durga.
The Mother goddess, symbolized as a female of great power, is a feminine aspect of each person s own higher Being. Whilst she has loving qualities, she also has fierce, powerful, punishing, and destructive ones, represented by the many warrior goddesses around the world. The war that she fights is against the forces of darkness and evil in Hinduism, the goddess Durga is said to have the power to protect someone from evil and misery through her ability to destroy its cause, which is the ego.
Goddess Kali destroying the egos in the fire of sacred sexuality.
This is most clearly portrayed in depictions of the Hindu goddess Kali (not to be confused with the demon Kali, which is written differently in Sanskrit) meaning she who destroys. Kali brandishes a weapon in her hands which beheads numerous demons. Her hands are bloodied and the heads of her enemies hang around her neck. Her enemies are the egos of the person, and she fights them within the person working to change. Kali is said to inhabit a cremation ground, which is the place where the egos are killed and destroyed in divine alchemical fire.
Note: Hinduism is a very ancient religion, which means that although at its root it is a white esoteric teaching, elements of it have also been distorted and infiltrated over time. There are traditions, some of them at least hundreds of years old, which worship the goddess Kali but practice black Tantrism and should obviously be avoided.
The Aztec goddess Coatlicue with an astonishingly similar necklace, skirt, and appearance as the Hindu goddess Kali.
Like Kali, the Aztec goddess Coatlicue is a Mother goddess with her deadly and destructive side emphasized. She bears an astonishing resemblance to Kali, with her teeth, breasts, and tongue bared, wearing a necklace made of human hearts, hands, and skulls. It is said that in her both the grave and womb exist, as the Mother has power over life and death both in a physical and spiritual sense. She gives us life, and takes it away; she is the force that has the power to put to death the egos, and give birth to the spiritual within.
The lion-headed Egyptian goddess Sekhmet (photo copyright wiki user Stormnight, 2006).
In Egypt, Sekhmet is the mother goddess Hathor in her destructive aspect, and her veneration appears to be thousands of years old. Sekhmet has the head of a lion and dresses in red like the Hindu goddess Durga, the color of blood. She is said to be the fiercest of all goddesses her name means "powerful one," but she also had titles such as "Mistress of Dread," "Lady of Slaughter," "Lady of Flame," and the
"one before whom evil trembles." She is the female warrior goddess, and it was said that death and destruction were balm for her warrior's heart. Like the Greek goddess Persephone who married the god of the underworld Hades, Sekhmet was also said to be married to Ptah, an Egyptian god associated with the underworld, creation, and darkness. Both Kali and Sekhmet were said to wreak such fierce destruction that they had to be placated to stop them from destroying humankind.
In Buddhism, the warrior aspect of the goddess also bears a resemblance to the Egyptian Sekhmet, Aztec Coatlicue, and Hindu Kali. She is Senge Dongma (Simhamukha in Sanskrit), who was created to destroy demons, and like Sekhmet she has the head of a lion and can be the color red. But also, like Kali, has been described as the color of dark clouds like those that bring rain or storms, and can appear as dark blue or black. Again, like Kali, she too is associated with cremation grounds, she holds a ritual knife in one hand, and a skull cap of blood in another, and has a headdress of five skulls and three eyes as Kali is sometimes depicted with. Like Kali and Coatlicue, her eyes are wide open, her tongue, teeth, and breasts are bared, she wears a skirt made of tiger skin, and a long necklace made of human bones and severed heads.
The Sumerian goddess Inanna and her lions. The scimitar in her left hand and the weapons sprouting from her shoulders indicate her war-like nature. (from a cylinder seal found in Iraq from the Akkadian Period, circa 2,254
2,193 BC)
In Hinduism the goddess Durga, who is closely connected to Kali and is also a fierce warrior wielding numerous weapons to slay demons, is depicted as mounted on a lion or tiger, paralleling the lion part of Sekhmet, Senge Dongma, and also Inanna. The Sumerian goddess Inanna was known as the Queen of Heaven, and as a goddess of sexual love and warfare. She was a powerful warrior whose chariot was drawn by lions and was often symbolized as a lioness in battle. The lion and tiger are both ferocious and powerful, and all are their prey. They are symbolic of the spirit which has the power to defeat evil.
The Greek goddess Hecate with a sword and snake in her hands, her arms like those of a strong warrior.
These goddesses were not only associated with death, but also with sex, Tantra, and fire. Senge
Dongma is known as the "Guardian of the Secret Tantric Teachings," and is depicted as circled by flames, with mythological links to a cremation ground. Kali is primarily a tantric goddess who inhabits a cremation ground. Durga is "Keeper of the Flame." Sekhmet is known as "Lady of Flame." The fire all these goddesses are associated with is the sacred sexual fire of kundalini. Inanna is a goddess of sexual love. The warrior aspect of the goddess is so intimately related to Tantrism, sex and fire, because it is in the fire of sexual alchemy that she destroys the egos, and also why she is linked to cremation grounds
symbolic of the incineration of the egos in the inner sexual fire.
The same deathly aspect of the mother goddess can be found in Greece as Hecate and Persephone. In the Pistis Sophia (an ancient esoteric Christian text), Jesus explains how the soul of a murderer is taken down into hell before Persephone and the receivers punish it with her chastisements for a time. Hecate has been depicted as a giant woman holding a torch and sword. It is interesting to note that at least Hecate (a pagan goddess) was demonized and degraded by the Church who associated her with witches and sorcery.
At the autumn equinox, the Mother descends into the underworld with the initiate to destroy their egos.
In the process of awakening, it is this feminine power that has this role.
In Hinduism, Durga is associated with the term Maya , in its meaning as the world of illusion, as she is the giver of nature, the physical body, and the subconscious, symbolized by the growing darkness following the summer solstice, which the consciousness enters into in joining the process of life. Whilst this world of Maya places limitations on our ability to perceive spiritual realities, without it there would be no darkness, and therefore no knowledge of light. Thus, the Mother provides the incredible world of learning we go into, whilst also having the power to free us from it.
Preparing the Way for the Spiritual to Be Born Within
The autumn equinox symbolizes the stage in the process of enlightenment in which an initiate works to prepare the way for the Son to be born within them. To do this, they must face the darkness of their own
psyche in their own inner underworld, and descend with the aid of their spiritual Mother to fight the egos and evil within, to emerge with the light and knowledge gained in darkness and later ascend. Here it is Lucifer, the light-bearer, who is the tempter in the work to incarnate the Christ/Son.
It is a time of sacrifice and death where the seed of latent potential within a person must die (symbolized by the wheat, rice, barley, or corn), forming the basis of the divine alchemical sexual fire the Mother uses to put the egos to death so that the light and life of the Son can be born within, which is symbolized at the winter solstice.
CHAPTER THREE
Ancient Sacred Sites Aligned to the Autumn Equinox
A careful study of mathematics, astronomy, and sacred symbolism reveals that many sites encode within them very ancient, timeless, and universal messages. Intended to stand the test of time, they have delivered their messages to people searching for truth ever since. Among them include messages about our planet, the nature of reality, the interconnectedness of creation, and the purpose of life. This is why studying how and why these ancient monuments mark certain celebrated astrological events, and the symbols they used, can reveal hidden information about their greater significance and meaning.
Here are a few of the most extraordinary cases in relation to the meaning of the autumn equinox (however, any site which aligns to the autumn equinox also aligns to the spring equinox, so you can find more sites aligned to the equinox in the chapter Ancient Sacred Sites Aligned to the Spring Equinox ).
The Great Pyramids ~ Egypt
Looking down the descending passage of the Great Pyramid.
At midnight on the autumn equinox in 2,170 BC, the pole star Alpha Draconis/Thuban, the chief star of the constellation Draco, depicted as a dragon and associated with the most deadly monster of Greek mythology called Typhon, shone down the central axis of the descending passage of the Great Pyramid.
This was the North Star at the time. It is calculated that at precisely the same instant in 2,170 BC, Alcyone, the star in the Pleiades group which our sun and solar system revolves around, stood exactly on the meridian of the Great Pyramid at that point in the heavens which is at right angles to the downward inclination of the descending passage.
Alpha Draconis also aligned with the descending passage in 3,350 BC. The next alignment was much more recently in AD 2004 with the North Star Polaris, in which its light was said to shine all the way down to the subterranean pit inside the pyramid on the autumn equinox. Polaris in Greek means Satan, which in this case is another name for Lucifer, the light-bringer, who is the tempter that must be overcome in order to attain light.
The Great Pyramid itself functioned as an enormous sundial. Its shadow to the north, and its reflected
sunlight to the south, accurately marked the annual dates of both the solstices and the equinoxes. Two of its faces are orientated precisely due east and west, which are the exact points of the rising and setting sun, only on the spring and autumn equinoxes.
A photo taken at the spring equinox, revealing for the first time that the Great Pyramid was eight-sided.
The four sides of the Great Pyramid are concave, which actually gives the pyramid eight faces instead of four. This is only perceptible from the air at dawn and sunset on the spring and autumn equinoxes.
Professor Robert Temple believes that just before and after these dates the western vertical halves of the north and south faces would have flashed with the sunlight at dawn, when the Great Pyramid still had its white limestone outer casing. The eastern vertical halves of the same faces would have flashed at sunset. The ceasing of the flash would prove that the equinox had arrived as the sun was briefly absolutely dead-on. This flash of light would have been visible for miles around, and is believed to have even been visible from the moon from which the pyramid would appear to light up like a star.
Chichen Itza ~ Mexico
The seven-scaled feathered serpent at Chichen Itza descending down the nine pyramid steps at the equinox.
At an ancient Mayan sacred site called Chichen Itza, there is a pyramid known as El Castillo dedicated to Kukulcán, the feathered serpent. At spring and autumn equinoxes the sun creates an undulating pattern of light on the nine terraces of the pyramid to display seven triangles of light which link up with a stone serpent head at its base. As the sun sets on the autumn equinox, the scales undulate and eventually disappear, giving the visual effect of the serpent descending the nine terraces of the pyramid (at the spring equinox the effect is of the serpent ascending) [reference: Andrew Collins, Gods of Eden].
Additionally, when one looks at the western face during the winter solstice, the sun appears to climb up the edge of the staircase until it rests momentarily directly above the temple before descending down
the other side. To read more about the incredible celestial alignments of this site see: http://www.world-
mysteries.com/chichen_kukulcan.htm.
The pyramid itself is a complex annual astronomical calendar. Its four sides each have ninety-one steps (the number of days between each of the solstices and equinoxes of the year).
The feathered serpent is an esoteric symbol found in various cultures (with the serpent symbolizing the higher feminine aspect of the person, and the feathers, the eagle, the higher male aspect). The nine terraces depict the nine layers of the underworld, which the Mayans were also aware of. The ascent and descent of the feathered serpent enacts the symbolic descent into the underworld and ascent out of it in the process of enlightenment. The descent of the feathered serpent down the nine layers of the underworld at
the autumn equinox, with its seven scales of light, parallels the symbols of descent into the underworld with seven solar bodies in other ancient sites below.
Mayan cultures periodically built larger temples and pyramids over the top of smaller ones. In the 1930s excavations revealed an earlier temple inside the pyramid of Kukulcán, which had been built over, revealing that this site has more ancient roots. Inside this earlier temple they found a chamber which contained a statue of Chac Mool, which in Mayan means red jaguar.
Unfortunately, this site became known for the practice of human sacrifice and bloodletting (along with other South American sites) thousands of people were sacrificed at this site, with the statue of Chac Mool and his cup turned up to receive the rays of the sun to his solar plexus chakra, instead used as a platter for human hearts.
As always, the culture there degenerated and was taken over by a savage people. Thus the esoteric knowledge became overlaid and overtaken by black magic (as has happened to ancient sites and spiritual teachings continuously throughout the world), giving it a terrible name. It is even recorded in myth that the great teacher Quetzalcoatl, who was symbolized as the feathered serpent, was opposed to human sacrifice. Tragically, his real message was turned away from and distorted as has happened with the message of true love and compassion of so many other great spiritual teachers throughout history.
Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan ~ Mexico
The Pyramid of the Sun which faces the equinox sunsets (photo copyright wiki user Nateirma, 2006).
The ancient Pyramid of the Sun in Mexico, whose builders are unknown, faces the exact point on the horizon where the sun sets at spring and autumn equinoxes. Seventy meters high and painted red, it was built on top of a cave with four chambers in the shape of a four-leaf clover. In ancient Mexico, caves were seen as passageways to the underworld. Here also, the feathered serpent was worshiped.
Intihuatana Stone ~ Peru
The Intihuatana Stone at the city of Machu Picchu (photo copyright Jordan Klein, 2005).
At the ancient city of Machu Picchu in Peru there is a stone called the Intihuatana stone (meaning
Hitching Post of the Sun ), which has been shown to be a precise indicator of the date of both the spring and autumn equinoxes and other significant celestial periods. At midday on the equinoxes, the sun stands almost directly above the pillar, creating no shadow at all. It is said that the Incas held ceremonies at the stone at these times. There is also an Intihuatana alignment with the summer solstice (which is in December in the southern hemisphere), when at sunset the sun sinks behind Pumasillo (the Puma's claw), the most sacred mountain of the western Vilcabamba range. Intihuatana stones were the supremely sacred objects of the Inca people.
Easter Island
The Maoi facing the equinox sunset at Ahu AKivi (photo copyright Ian Sewell, 2006).
On Easter Island, the most remote inhabited island in the world, there are numerous markers of astronomical alignments. Seven giant statues called Moai at the site called Ahu Akivi look out to the ocean. They face the sunset during the autumn (and spring) equinox. They also faced the helical setting of the constellation of Orion in 1,300 AD (helical describes the conjunction of a star or constellation with the sun as it rises or sets).
In Egyptian culture, the constellation Orion corresponded to the god Osiris, whose life events, like those of Jesus, followed the process of awakening. The descent of this constellation may have symbolized the descent into the underworld (beneath the horizon), which is the stage represented in myths around the world at the time of the autumn equinox.
Dzibilchaltun ~ The Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico
The "temple of the seven dolls" at Dzibilchaltun at the equinox the sun shines through the central doorway.
At the ancient Mayan site of Dzibilchaltún, there is a temple called The Temple of Seven Dolls because seven small clay human figures were found buried in the ground there. The temple has openings in the form of a Mayan arch toward the four cardinal points. The rising sun on the spring and autumn equinox shines through central doorway of the temple in a beautiful display of light toward a single erect stone.
The seven dolls found here parallel the seven Maoi on Easter Island that face the autumn equinox sunset. Perhaps they too were meant to symbolize the descent of the initiate with their seven solar bodies into the underworld at the time of the autumn equinox, as the dolls were found buried in the ground.
WINTER SOLSTICE
The Birth of the Spiritual Son
CHAPTER FOUR
The Spiritual Meaning of the Winter Solstice
The ancient Neolithic temple of Newgrange in Ireland, which has an inner chamber in the shape of a cruciform that aligns to sunrise on the winter solstice, thousands of years before the birth of Jesus (photo copyright wiki user Shira, 2006).
The birth of a divine child and savior at the winter solstice has formed a central part of spiritual beliefs throughout the world since the beginning of history in ancient Egypt as the birth of Horus, the birth of Mithras in Persia, the birth of Jesus at Christmas, the birth of the divine son at Alban Arthan of the Druids,
etc. These celebrations are evidence of how people separated by vast distances and time have tapped into a universal spiritual principle that is just as relevant now as it was then.
They speak to us of a mysterious and universal understanding of spiritual transformation. All things which come into being must first be born. Even as creation was borne by the great Mother of the universe, so too must we be born of the spirit to become spirit. The winter solstice is a celebration of being "born again" not of flesh, but of the spirit. It s a celebration of the birth of the spiritual Son, the Christ, within a person s consciousness in the process of awakening.
Symbolized as a child just as the winter sun is at its weakest, it will grow until reaching its full strength at the summer solstice just as the spirit grows within a prepared individual to transform them completely from inner darkness into light.
The Birth of the Sun
The meaning of the winter solstice operates on a number of levels. At its core is the birth of the sun both universally and personally.
The rising of the sun on the winter solstice, out of the darkest day of the year, echoes the birth of the light from the dark void on the first day of creation.
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said, Let there be light: and there was light. And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness. And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day.
~ Genesis 1:1-5, The Bible
The connection between the winter solstice and the birth of the sun at the dawning of creation is why the ancient Egyptians aligned their Temple of Karnak, the largest temple in the world, to the winter solstice sunrise and dedicated it to their supreme creator god Amun. This temple was devoted to creation, and was even expanded upon according to the Fibonacci sequence, which is a mathematical principle found in the growth and expansion of life.
The sun that exists in the physical world as the fire we see in the sky also exists in the higher dimensions as a spiritual fire, as the spiritual source of all creation. This is why there is an overlap in the creation story in Genesis between natural and supernatural phenomenon, and in many accounts of creation in spiritual cultures. The natural phenomenon is the physical, tangible manifestation of the supernatural phenomenon. This is why many spiritual cultures throughout the world venerated the sun they knew of its supreme, spiritual side.
The spiritual sun is a living and divine fire, and the highest source of all creation, as explained in ancient sacred texts from around the world. However, as creation follows universal principles, the birth of the sun also represents the birth of the spiritual sun within an individual in the process of enlightenment. It is born into the time of most darkness the physical sun gives life to the external world; the spiritual sun gives spiritual life to the individual.
The Birth of the Divine Savior
Every spiritual teaching throughout the world had some word for attaining enlightenment, whether it was awakening, self-realization, salvation, imperishability, or immortality, etc. Most still have remnants of a divine savior associated with the sun, and many associated the birth of this savior with the winter solstice. This divine savior always taught humanity how to achieve enlightenment, to become a "son of God."
Although Christmas is now largely a corporate money making scheme and time of selfish indulgence, the birth of the savior was intended to bring to earth a profound spiritual message for the whole of humankind. This message was continually brought to earth anew as previous teachings became old, obscure, and locked within religious dogma. These teachings often became seen as the exclusive property of a certain group who then fought to wipe out competing religions, when really they were just the same universal teaching given in different times and circumstances.
For those who are working toward enlightenment now and have done throughout history, the teaching of these divine saviors had a dual aspect they taught the work to enlightenment in what they said, but also in the events of their lives.
A study of the events of the lives of the divine savior in different times and cultures, such as Jesus (esoteric Christian), Mithras (Persian), Hu/Hesus (Druid), Horus (Egyptian), etc., reveal that the events of their lives match the progress of the sun throughout the year, and the zodiac.
Many theorize that this happened because the different religions borrowed from one another. Others point to the fact that each of these deities was closely associated with the sun, and therefore were merely representing the astrological worship of the sun to simple-minded sun worshipers, waiting for their crops to grow, etc.
But there is another explanation for this incredible similarity. Often this explanation was only known by the initiates of esoteric schools who encoded the knowledge of it in the symbols of sacred sites. To the public these often complex symbols look obscure and even nonsensical, therefore protecting the knowledge from those who would deride and destroy it. This mechanism has helped to preserve much of the knowledge found in sacred sites up until this day.
Each of these deities was known as a savior of mankind, and a beloved and sacred divine child. Each of these deities was associated with the sun, and all of them born at the winter solstice in a miraculous virgin birth. The lives and stories of these deities tells us of a great mystery, which in the case of Jesus, he came to earth with a mission to reveal both in the events of his life and his teachings.
The Potential of Consciousness
An ancient depiction of the Madonna and child in Egypt, with Isis/Hathor the divine mother nursing her son Horus.
Every human being is a latent spiritual potential that lies dormant like a seed. We live asleep to the greater realities of existence, but whether we choose to realize it or not, each of us has the potential to become an awakened spiritual being. This is why sacred texts from ancient times and still today, always point toward enlightenment as the ultimate goal of life.
Literally, the work of enlightenment is found written in the cosmos in the movement of the sun and stars, which is why so many ancient spiritual cultures incorporated celestial movements into their spiritual monuments and sacred texts. This is what life is created for, so no wonder we find it reflected to us from the heavens, and intrinsic to everything around us. This is so we can always discover our true purpose for being here and realize our own spiritual potential when we choose to search for it.
The creative process which gives birth to the universe also gives birth to the spiritual within a human.
Thus the divine savior is not just born into the world, they can be born within us into the symbolic stables, prison, or cave, which is the spirit entering into the humble and limited fleshly vehicle of the body.
When you come to know yourselves, then you will become known, and you will realize that it is you who are the sons of the living father. But if you will not know yourself, you dwell in poverty and it is you who are that poverty.
~ Jesus, The Book of Thomas the Contender
The scene of the annunciation and birth of the king of heaven at the Luxor Temple in Egypt (also called the Temple of Man as it is laid out in the shape of a human body, thus the divine king is born into a person). Firstly the female goddess Neith (the primordial waters) is told by Thoth that she will become pregnant with Ra (the King of Heaven who later became known as the god Horus). Kneph and Hathor impregnate Neith via the ankh, the key of life, and thus Neith remains "ever virgin." The birth occurs over a birthing brick, and praise is given by the gods to the divine newborn son.
The Birth of the Spiritual Sun Within
We are born as physical beings, but in order to become spiritual we must be born as spiritual beings. It is through the birth of the Christ (a name which should not be understood as belonging to any religion but the word that describes a universal spiritual force), the cosmic fire represented by the sun, that this potential can be realized, like a seed that finally germinates, and this is what Jesus meant when he said that we must be born again.
There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews: The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mother s womb, and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.
~ John 3:1-7, The Bible
This need to be "born again" was also taught in the Eleusinian mystery schools of ancient Greece in which the human condition was seen as a tomb, and why the Christ in many different cultures (as Viracocha, Jesus, Mithras, Hu Gadarn, etc.) was symbolized as being born into a cave as explained further below:
The soul of man often called Psyche, and in the Eleusinian Mysteries
symbolized by Persephone is essentially a spiritual thing. Its true home is in the higher worlds, where, free from the bondage of material form and material concepts, it is said to be truly alive and self-expressive. The human, or physical, nature of man, according to this doctrine, is a tomb, a quagmire, a false and impermanent thing, the source of all sorrow and suffering. Plato describes the body as the sepulcher of the soul; and by this he means not only the human form but also the human nature.
The gloom and depression of the Lesser Mysteries represented the agony of the spiritual soul unable to express itself because it has accepted the limitations and
illusions of the human environment. The crux of the Eleusinian argument was that man is neither better nor wiser after death than during life. If he does not rise above ignorance during his sojourn here, man goes at death into eternity to wander about forever, making the same mistakes which he made here. If he does not outgrow the desire for material possessions here, he will carry it with him into the invisible world, where, because he can never gratify the desire, he will continue in endless agony.
Dante's Inferno is symbolically descriptive of the sufferings of those who never freed their spiritual natures from the cravings, habits, viewpoints, and limitations of their Plutonic personalities. Those who made no endeavor to improve themselves (whose souls have slept) during their physical lives, passed at death into Hades, where, lying in rows, they slept through all eternity as they had slept through life.
To the Eleusinian philosophers, birth into the physical world was death in the fullest sense of the word, and the only true birth was that of the spiritual soul of man rising out of the womb of his own fleshly nature. The soul is dead that slumbers, says Longfellow, and in this he strikes the keynote of the Eleusinian Mysteries. Just as Narcissus, gazing at himself in the water (the ancients used this mobile element to symbolize the transitory, illusionary, material universe) lost his life trying to embrace a reflection, so man, gazing into the mirror of Nature and accepting as his real self the senseless clay that he sees reflected, loses the opportunity afforded by physical life to unfold his immortal, invisible Self.
~ Manly P. Hall, The Secret Teachings of All Ages
To be born of the spirit is not a matter of adopting or changing beliefs for anything to be born, it must follow the same process of creation which we see on the largest of scales, right to the very smallest, throughout the whole of creation. In the quote from the Gospel of John above, Jesus refers to the waters and the spirit that moves upon it, as found in the story of creation in Genesis in the Bible, which gave rise to the birth of the sun on the first day. The waters is the female force, found symbolized in Mary, and Isis,
etc. and the spirit moving upon it is the male force, symbolized by the Father, and Osiris, etc. These same forces of creation can be found in creation myths throughout sacred texts of the word. This is explained further in our free eBook Return to Source.
The male and female forces are what give birth to all life. At the dawn of creation, their union gave birth to the sun and the entirety of creation. This birth of the sun, on an esoteric level, is the birth of the spiritual sun the birth of the force of the Son/Christ within. To be born of water and the Spirit, is a reference to the often secret practice of alchemy, which was referred to as "the bridal chamber" in the texts of esoteric Christianity.
Spiritual Birth from Alchemical Union
Crowned as god and goddess, man and woman are co-creators in this medieval painting, giving birth to the divine child from out of the sexual waters.
Physically, we know that sex between a man and a woman creates a child. Out of a tiny egg, an unmanifested potential springs forth almost miraculously becoming an entirely new human being that grows just as a plant from out of a tiny little seed. Thus we see within man and woman, the primordial forces of the Egyptian father god Amun and his wife, the Egyptian mother goddess Mut, which give rise to all creation. These three forces have been symbolized time and again, as Osiris, Isis, and their son Horus (Egyptian); Father, Mary, and Jesus (Christian); Zarathustra, Anahita, and Mithras (Persian); Celu, Cariadwen, and Hu Gadarn (of the Druids); and many, many others.
This incredible power of creation we each have is mentioned in Genesis, where it says that we are created in the image of God:
So God created mankind in his own image,
in the image of God he created them;
male and female he created them.
~ Genesis 1:27, The Bible
But this power to create is not limited to the creation of a physical child. Within the human being we also find the materials of spiritual creation. From this union of male and female, not only can children be born, but also the Son within, just as the spiritual sun, the Son, is born from the union of these forces at the dawning of creation.
This process has been referred to in many esoteric traditions as Tantrism in the East, the bridal chamber of the esoteric Christians, HeQi in Taoism, and alchemy in the Middle Ages, in which man and woman in sexual union are depicted as spiritual co-creators. It involves the purification of the waters, which are the sexual energies, in preparation for creation; the awakening of the sacred fiery energy called kundalini symbolized as the serpent rising up the spine in ancient India, and crowning the forehead in Egypt; the creation of the wedding garments (which are spiritual bodies of gold created in the bridal chamber), referred to by Jesus; and many other spiritual processes which must be gone through, until the initiate has reached a spiritual level required for the Son to be born within.
The seed of your body need not enter the body of woman to create life; for the power of the angel of Earth can create the life of the spiritual within, as well as the life of the body without.
~ Jesus from The Essene Gospel of Peace
The energy of the kidneys is under the water sign. When the desires are stirred, it runs downward, is directed outward, and creates children. If, in the moment of
release, it is not allowed to flow outward, but is led back by the energy of thought so that it penetrates the crucible of the Creative, and refreshes heart and body and nourishes them, that also is the backward-flowing method. Therefore it is said, The Way of the Elixir of Life depends entirely on the backward-flowing method.
~ A description of Tantrism from the Taoist text The Secret of the Golden Flower
The first integration of yin and yang is the union of seed and egg within the womb.
The second integration of yin and yang is the sexual union of the mature male and female. Both of these are concerned with flesh and blood, and all that is conceived in this realm must one day disintegrate and pass away. It is only the third integration which gives birth to something immortal, In this integration, a highly evolved individual joins the subtle inner energies of yin and yang under the light of spiritual understanding. Through the practices of the Integral Way he refines his gross, heavy energy into something ethereal and light. This divine light has the capability of penetrating into the mighty ocean of spiritual energy and complete wisdom that is the Tao.
~ Hua Hu Ching
Just as physical fire has the ability to destroy and create things, so does this inner Christic fire have the same ability to destroy the negative aspects of ourselves and allow us to be completely born again
as a spiritual being, which eventually becomes whole and returns to the source of creation (celebrated at the summer solstice), the Absolute (the Brahman of ancient India), as an enlightened and awakened Deva, a son of God.
We find this referenced in John where he speaks about Christ as the true Light (which is the light of the spiritual sun) and the potential we each have to become a son of God, and that this happens through being born of God, which is the sacred process of creation that occurs in alchemy.
That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
~ John 1:9-13, The Bible
The Birth of the World Teacher
The pre-Inca and Inca creator god Viracocha, who is said to come disguised as a beggar to teach people and perform miracles.
Christmas is not only the celebration of the birth of the divine savior into the human it is also a celebration of the birth of the Christ into the world as the world teacher. Jesus, Horus, and Mithras were all referred to as a "divine savior." The divine savior has a dual meaning the Son/Christ both saves the individual by entering into them and transforming them spiritually, and also works to save humanity by teaching through the individual that is entered into. The mission of the Christ within a person, and thus in the world, is to save.
The Son is the neutral force of creation. In Persia, Mithras is known as the Mediator. This is because the Son within a person acts to reconcile us with divinity; and as the world teacher, acts as the intermediary between humanity and divinity, becoming a link between heaven and earth so that humanity can be guided toward realizing their own inner potential through an understanding of the sacred universal knowledge.
Many people become attached to a particular religion, denouncing others as untrue. But all the great religions sprouted from universal spiritual truths given to humanity by those with the Son within throughout time, which is why they have such seemingly inexplicable similarities. Once a person who has the Son within is rejected by that religion and leaves it, the religion loses the living guidance which gave it the vital connection between the heavens and the earth needed to form a true living teaching. And so the Son must come again to give spiritual truth anew through another spiritually prepared individual. The aim of an esotericist is to always find the living Son to receive the direct living wisdom of the divine
cosmic, omnipresent, and beyond all religious ideas.
In the legends of the pre-Inca and Inca people, the creator god Viracocha, who is depicted with a crown of the sun and whose image appears in a cliff in the Urubamba Sacred Valley that reflects and refracts the rays of the sun on the winter solstice, rose from Lake Titicaca (or sometimes the cave of Pacaritambo) during the time of darkness to bring forth light. Viracocha made the earth, the stars, the sky, and mankind (the light emerges from the primordial waters, or the cave which is a symbol of the womb,
and proceeds to make creation). It was said that he wandered the earth disguised as a beggar, teaching his new creations the basics of civilization, as well as working numerous miracles (just as Jesus did, who had the Christ within). He wept when he saw the plight of the creatures he had created.
The ancient Indian creator god Vishnu is said to incarnate in different avatars (the most famous of which are Rama and Krishna) throughout the various ages, and that these incarnations take place in all Yugas and cosmic cycles.
Whenever spirituality decays and materialism is rampant, then O Arjuna, I
reincarnate Myself! To protect the righteous, to destroy the wicked and to establish the kingdom of God, I am reborn from age to age.
~ Krishna, The Bhagavad Gita
This divine savior is always said to one day return. It was thought that Viracocha would re-appear in times of trouble (just as other Christic saviors such as Jesus, Mithras, and the avatars of Vishnu, etc. are believed to). This is the return of the Christ within the individual to teach humanity the way toward enlightenment. There are many, many men and women who have incarnated the Christ and taught humanity throughout history many of whom are completely unknown to history. However, there are others who are born awakened, like Jesus, who come with a mission from the divine source to show the way to enlightenment in the events of their lives.
The Meaning of the Cave and Stables Where the Christ Is Born
A depiction of the birth of Jesus as a baby into a cave. Although it is highly unlikely the creator of this image knew of the esoteric symbolism it represents, the symbols first given in the teachings of Jesus have been passed on and retain their meaning nevertheless (photo copyright wiki user Deror Avi, 2009).
The winter solstice sun is born at the darkest point of the year. The sun is at its lowest, most southerly point in the sky. This is because all creation takes place from out of darkness and chaos, as it did on the first day in Genesis, in Egyptian mythology, and in the verses of the ancient Hindu text the Rig Veda.
The cave symbolizes the womb from which all of creation is born and emerges, the primordial chaos.
This is why Mithras was born in a cave, and why Jesus was also said to be born in a cave in the Gospel of James. In Armenian tradition, Mithras was believed to shut himself up in a cave from which he emerged once a year, born anew. The pre-Inca and Inca creator god Viracocha, who was crowned with the sun, was also said to be born in a cave to bring light into the darkness.
At the Dinas Mountain in Wales there is a nearby cave that goes by a Welsh name meaning "Voice of God" where the Druids enacted the birth of their solar god Hu Gadarn (the Mabyn Taliesun) from within the cave. The Druid priest acting as Hu Gadarn gave a loud musical shout to which the gathered crowds would reply "Ein Hoes," meaning "Our Life!"
Incredibly, at the ancient Neolithic site of Newgrange, the winter solstice sunlight enters an otherwise giant dark mound precisely at sunrise. The ray of light travels up and illuminates the chamber which is in the shape of a cross. Here the cross is associated with the divine Son/Christ on the winter solstice,
thousands of years before Jesus. The cross is an alchemical symbol showing the union of the phallus and uterus, of male and female, which gives birth to all creation and the Son. The Son is born as the sun into the mound, which acts as the womb. Also inside the chamber are found spiral designs, showing the spiraling nature of creation, along with a tri-spiral design, which possibly represented the mother, father, and son trinity of creation and the nativity.
In the nativity scene of the Gospels, Jesus is also said to be born in stables amongst animals. The stables symbolize the physical body of the initiated human being, and the animals represent the egos which we have within that are animalistic in nature, such as anger, pride, envy, hatred, etc. This shows that although someone must have reached a spiritually prepared enough level for the Son to be born within, when the Son comes, they are still in darkness and with the egos. The force of the Son then works within to destroy these egos, and spiritually transform the initiate. This is what it means to be "saved" in Jesus' teachings.
Mithras emerges from the rock holding a torch of fire and a sword.
Stone murals of Mithras found in once secret chambers beneath Rome show Mithras emerging from a rock holding a flaming torch, again associating the divine Son with fire and light. The Son brings light to our inner darkness. Mithras is also depicted holding a sword as he emerges, and this shows how the Son comes into the initiate to fight the darkness both in the subconscious of the initiate and in the world, to overcome it, transforming the initiate into total light, into a totally awakened conscious being.
Krishna is born at the winter solstice into a prison. This symbolizes the birth of the Son into the body of the initiate, which is a temporary vehicle that is to the divine as a limited prison.
The Son is born as a baby at the winter solstice as all things that are born must start small and grow.
The sun at this time is small and weak as a baby, and so Horus and Jesus were depicted at this time as
babies in a manger. At the winter solstice the Druids would gather in Wales to watch the sun rise over the sacred mountain of Mynydd Dinas, and believed the sun represented the birth of a divine baby son who grew as the year progressed toward the summer solstice. This is a representation of the birth of the spiritual within, because just as a baby is born as something that feels and perceives but is not able to do much, the birth of the Son within someone is as a new feeling and new way of perceiving, but yet to become something much more, which the Son within develops into just as Jesus in the Gospels grows to become an adult, progressing through other symbolic events in his life.
Although the light is born at the winter solstice, giving hope, it is still born into darkness and has yet to grow.
The Spiritual Treasure Found in the Depths of Darkness
Glastonbury Tor with its man-made terraces and tower (photo copyright Josep Renalias).
At the autumn equinox, the initiate, symbolized by John the Baptist, must descend into the darkness of
himself and of Hades/hell. He descends the nine layers of the underworld to uncover the darkness of his own subconscious in order to transform it into consciousness, and incarnate the Son within.
At a pyramid in Chichen Itza, Mexico, a feathered serpent created by patterns of light on the temple s nine terraces appears to descend at the autumn equinox. This symbolizes the descent of the initiate into the underworld, and the dark regions of their own psychology. Then, at the winter solstice, the sun appears to ascend the nine terraces before shining momentarily at the temple atop the pyramid s peak. The pyramid at Chichen Itza illustrates the birth of the sun/Son, which appears from the lowest point, the womb of the earth, and rises through the nine terraces, which are the nine layers of the underworld (as described by Dante in his esoteric work The Divine Comedy and by the ancient Mayans). The number nine not only represents the nine layers of the underworld, but also the sexual work of alchemy, which is referred to esoterically as the work in the ninth sphere and that which gives birth to the spiritual within.
Similarly, at Glastonbury Tor during the winter solstice, the sun appears at the base of the constructed mound, rises up seven terraces, and clips the pinnacle of the tower. Incredibly, the constellation Orion, which is associated with Osiris, the Father of creation, and the star Sirius, associated with Isis, the Mother, also both align with the Tor at the winter solstice, as if the nativity scene is recreated in the sky.
This site symbolizes the sun as it rises and ascends the seven terraces, entering the seven dimensions of the universe (also known as seven heavens in Hinduism and Buddhism), and also on a personal level, the seven solar bodies of the initiate (the "wedding garments" Jesus refers to), symbolized by the seven statues on Easter Island that face the autumn equinox sunset.
The ancient mythological hero Jason seizing the Golden Fleece, the magical treasure he quested after in his symbolic journey.
The ancient mythological hero Jason seizing the Golden Fleece, the magical treasure he quested after in his symbolic journey.
These sites, separated by vast distances and time, symbolize the same process at the same time of year. At the winter solstice, in the womb of the earth, in the midst of darkness and chaos, the spirit is born
the Son. This is the fabled treasure said to exist in the very lowest chamber beneath Glastonbury Tor, known in ancient Greece as the Golden Fleece.
Why Christmas Is Celebrated on the 25th of December, Three Days after the Winter Solstice
The word solstice literally means "sun stands still." At the winter solstice, the sun for the first time will begin to increase both lengthening the amount of daylight and progressing north along the horizon after
having reached its most southerly point. For three days however, the sun does not visibly appear to move northward along the horizon, thus appearing to "stand still" in its progression. In correlation, we find the winter solstice celebrated as the birth of the sun on the winter solstice on the 22nd of December (in the northern hemisphere), and the divine savior three days later on the 25th of December. Jesus, Horus, Krishna, Mithras, Dionysus, etc., are all said to have been born on the 25th of December. In the southern hemisphere the Incas celebrated their festival of Inti Raymi three days following the winter solstice on around June 24th; over these three days they fasted and refrained from lighting fires in anticipation.
There is a spiritual significance to this. The birth of the spiritual sun on the winter solstice is the birth of the Son at the dawning of creation. From the Son comes all of creation, just as in ancient India the golden womb created from the male and female forces at the dawning of creation gives birth to Brahma, the creator god, and the entire universe called Brahm-anda.
In the Vedas of ancient India, the supreme creator god Vishnu was known as the triple-strider (as Tri-vikrama and as Uru-krama). It is said that he created the universe, making the dwelling of humanity possibly, by taking three steps one encompassing the earth, the other the air, and the third the heights of heaven, which is his supreme abode. This is because the cosmic fire of the Son enters the universe in three steps.
The three days where the sun stands still is symbolic of the Son first being born at the dawning of creation, represented by the winter solstice, and then fully entering creation, which occurs in three steps
from out of the supreme abode, down to the air, which are the higher dimensions, with his foot finally upon the earth, which is the physical, material plane. On the third step, the Son has fully entered into creation, widely celebrated as Christmas.
The word solstice literally means sun stands still. At the winter solstice, the sun for the first time will begin to increase both lengthening the amount of daylight and progressing north along the horizon after having reached its most southerly point. For 3 days however, the sun does not visibly appear to move northward along the horizon, thus appearing to stand still in its progression. In association, we find the winter solstice celebrated as the birth of the sun on the winter solstice on the 22nd of December (in the northern hemisphere), and the divine savior 3 days later on the 25th of December. Jesus, Horus, Krishna, Mithras, (prominent during the time of the Roman Empire prior to Jesus the Christ) Dionysus, etc., are all said to have been born on the 25th of December.
The word solstice literally means "sun stands still." At the winter solstice, the sun for the first time will begin to increase both lengthening the amount of daylight and progressing north along the horizon after having reached its most southerly point. For three days however, the sun does not visibly appear to move northward along the horizon, thus appearing to "stand still" in its progression. In correlation, we find the winter solstice celebrated as the birth of the sun on the winter solstice on the 22nd of December (in the northern hemisphere), and the divine savior three days later on the 25th of December. Jesus, Horus, Krishna, Mithras, Dionysus, etc., are all said to have been born on the 25th of December.
The Three Steps into the Seven Dimensions
The neutral force of the Son emerges at the dawn of creation, represented by the rising sun on the winter solstice. The three forces of Mother, Father, and Son, which are negative, positive, and neutral, give rise
to all of creation.
Tao produced Unity; Unity produced Duality; Duality produced Trinity; and Trinity produced all existing objects.
~ The Tao Te Ching
But creation, which is in three forces, needs organization, and so it unfolds through the number seven; seven is the number by which all of creation is organized. Thus in the story of Genesis in the Bible there are seven days of creation and in the universe there are seven dimensions. In a person doing the spiritual work there are seven serpents of light to raise in the seven purified bodies (which must be created through alchemy). These bodies correspond to the seven dimensions, and representations of them can be found in ancient Egypt, India, and Easter Island.
In the secret initiatory schools of Mithrasim there were seven degrees of initiation.
These degrees allowed the neophyte to proceed through the seven celestial bodies, allowing the reversing of the human soul's descent into the world at birth.
~ Dr. Masoud Homayouri Origin of Persian Gnosis
The seven Maoi facing the equinox sunset at Ahu Akivi on Easter Island representing the seven spiritual bodies in the seven dimensions (photo copyright Ian Sewell, 2006).
In the process of initiation and awakening, the Son (like Vishnu) must take three steps through the seven dimensions in order to enter into an individual, which is the birth of the Son within the physical body of person. The initiate must have created the seven purified solar bodies (the "wedding garments"
referred to by Jesus) by the time of the autumn equinox, symbolized by the seven statues at Easter Island that align to the setting sun on the autumn equinox. The Son then takes three steps through the dimensions and these bodies, before entering or being "born" into the physical body of the initiate.
The Hindu god Vishnu, with the seven serpents raised and a golden halo. It was said he took three steps to complete creation (image copyright wiki user Nyo, 2007).
The Son moves from the world of the spirit of the seventh dimension, into the soul of the sixth dimension, and then to the body. These are the three steps, which are described below in the esoteric Christian text the Pistis Sophia, which was excluded from the Bible. Jesus describes entering chaos and
Hades three times, and finally then into the prison of the body.
And I went into the realm of darkness and I endured till I entered the middle of the prison. And the foundations of chaos shook. And I hid myself from them because of their wickedness, and they did not recognize me.
Again I returned for the second time, and I went about. I came forth from those who belong to the light, which is I, the remembrance of the Pronoia. I entered into the midst of darkness and the inside of Hades, since I was seeking (to accomplish) my task. And the foundations of chaos shook, that they might fall down upon those who are in chaos and might destroy them. And again I ran up to my root of light, lest they be destroyed before the time.
Still for a third time I went I am the light which exists in the light, I am the remembrance of the Pronoia that I might enter into the midst of darkness and the inside of Hades. And I filled my face with the light of the completion of their aeon.
And I entered into the midst of their prison, which is the prison of the body. And I said,
He who hears, let him get up from the deep sleep.'
~ Jesus, in the Apocryphn of John from the Nag Hammadi Library
In each of the three steps, Christ enters into the chaos of man, which is the foundation of the human psyche, the inferior-dimensional regions of the mind and inner structure of the human being, and is born from the sexual waters of the great Mother, which are the chaos and womb of creation within a person.
The three Great Pyramids of Egypt (photo copyright Ricardo Liberato, 2006).
In the process of self-realization, there are three major stages called three mountains. These were represented in ancient Egypt as the three Great Pyramids that align to the three stars in the constellation Orion, called Orion s belt. The Egyptians associated the constellation Orion with the god Osiris, whose life represented the process of awakening.
There are also three parts that compose the inner structure of a self-realized person, which need to be created.
Firstly, the four bodies that each person has the physical, vital, astral, and mental bodies must be purified and formed as solar bodies through alchemy. Secondly, three other bodies must be created through alchemy to make seven in total, so that Atman (the divine spirit in the seventh dimension), Buddhi (the divine soul in the sixth dimension), and Manas (the human soul in the sixth dimension) can be incarnated. When these seven solar bodies are formed, the Son can enter into the initiate in three steps
firstly by coming out of the Mother and Father and entering into the seventh dimension and seventh solar body; secondly by entering into the first Trinity of Atman, Buddhi, Manas; and thirdly entering into the four bodies, which are the physical, vital, astral, and mental bodies. Upon entering the four bodies on the
third step, the Son is "born" in the physical person. This is the real Christmas a personal, sacred, and spiritual event.
The Egyptian symbol of the djed pillar which represents the god Osiris. It shows the four bodies physical, vital, astral and mental as the four notches on the pillar. The spirit sits upon these as the double feather plume, serpents, and sun disk. The serpents represent the Mother, the feathers the Father, and the sun the Son, making up the three forces of the trinity of creation as the symbol of the feathered serpent. The feathered serpent can also be found in Mithraic, Mayan, and Aztec spirituality and has the same meaning. The four bodies plus the three forces (of the trinity) correspond to the seven bodies (physical, vital, astral, mental, causal, buddhic, atmic) and seven dimensions.
From here, the Son will reunite the initiate with the Mother and then Father, so that the trinity of creation is incarnated at the spring equinox. With the three original forces of creation together again, they return to being whole as the first androgynous being which emerged from the divine source (before it divided into Mother and Father and gave birth to the Son). Whole again but now totally conscious of their own existence, the initiate can return to the Absolute, the original source of the three forces of creation.
The Number Four
The number four is found related to the winter solstice and the process of creation throughout the world.
There is only one Maoi statue on Easter Island that has four hands it is the one that faces the rising sun on the winter solstice. The great Hindu god Vishnu is depicted with four arms. The ancient Mayans sometimes depicted the sun as "Ah Kin," which is "He of the Sun." He is represented as a human carrying the glyph of the Kin, which is a flower with four petals. The ancient Mayans believed that the great Father and Mother created the world with four sides. The ancient Neolithic inhabitants of Ireland divided their sacred landscape into quadrants with a sacred center. And the Egyptian God Horus was said to have four solar sons who came forth from a lotus blossom and were associated with creation (just as the Hindu creator God Brahma is born from a lotus flower to make creation).
The number four is that which forms the foundation of life and encompasses the bounds of creation. It is found in the four cardinal directions; the four points of the cross of the year, which are the two solstices and equinoxes; the four elements; the dimensions of our physical world which are length, width, height, and time; the four bodies of the person physical, vital, astral, and mental which the Son enters into; and the four sides of the philosopher's stone upon which the work of awakening is built.
The fourth dimension is time, which is needed for beings to be able to become conscious of their own existence. Within our three-dimensional world, we find life manifest in form and substance in the flow of time. Thus, in creation, the Son who is one of the three forces of creation establishes the four, which is the foundation of life and found in the movement of the sun, which forms a symbolic cross of four points. In the work to awakening, the initiate must establish the four within themselves as the foundation of the inner spiritual work.
The Word Penetrates Chaos
Chaos is a very important aspect of creation, as all of life emerges from chaos and as it expands, gradually establishes order, which forms laws, harmony, beauty, and intelligence.
As it happens in creation, this same process also happens internally when working toward enlightenment the old must dissolve into chaos before the spiritual can be born within, and this is why the initiate has to descend into darkness at the autumn equinox and chaos, before the birth of the Son occurs at the winter solstice.
This same principle is found in a study of sound called Cymatics. It was discovered that as sound moved to higher and higher frequencies, the patterns it formed became more complex, but that the pattern would first dissolve into chaos, before creating the next more complex pattern. This illustrates how creation arises from chaos.
The power of sound to transform matter relates back to Genesis, where God famously created with the word by saying Let there be light, and in the first line of John In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The ancient Indians who wrote the Vedas said that the famous mantra "Om" was present at the beginning of creation, and is the sound of the primordial cosmic vibration. The Christ, the divine Son, is the Logos, the Word, and penetrates into the chaos of the individual in order to create something spiritually superior to what was there before.
The Children of the Sun
The Inca celebration of Inti Raymi (which can be translated as The Solemn Christmas of the Sun ) is one of the most famous winter solstice celebrations in the world, still attended by around 120,000 people each year. It has its roots in the ancient Incan veneration of the sun. The Inca saw the sun as their natural father and most revered God, and themselves as its offspring. The 16th century chronicler Garcilaso de la Vega wrote, They (the Incas) made this solemn celebration to the Sun God in gratitude for having him and worship him as the highest, only and universal God who with his light and virtue raised and sustained all things on the Earth. And in gratitude for him being the father of the first Inca, his wife, and their children, and all his descendants that were sent to the Earth for the universal benefit of people. For these reasons this celebration was the most solemn of celebrations.
The birth of the spiritual sun within has been symbolized in every truly spiritual culture and teaching of the world, as it is one of the greatest spiritual goals, and an integral part of the reintegration and return to divinity. This is why so many ancient cultures, such as the Sumerians, Egyptians, Essenes, the Indians of North and Central America, the Inca, and the Maya, all referred to themselves as the "Children of the Sun" or "Children of the Light." As Jesus, Mithras, Krishna, Horus, etc. showed us, we too can become children of the sun. This is the eternal cosmic message vibrating in everything around us.
While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light.
~ Jesus, John from the Bible
The Light of the World Is Born to Give Hope to the World
The initiate descends into the darkness at the autumn equinox, but in the midst of that darkness finally receives the treasure of the light of the Son, experiencing the birth of the divine child within their own inner stables. From the time of the winter solstice, like the sun and the seed beneath the ground, the Son begins to grow from out of the darkness and the chaos. We can realize our enormous spiritual potential, just as the seed buried in the earth at autumn germinates at the winter solstice, sprouts into the flower of beauty and fragrance at spring, and reaches the height of its potential and majesty at the summer solstice.
The Son symbolizes the hope of humanity, saving us from the darkness of our own inner poverty, and reuniting us with divinity, making us both a Son of Man and Son of God. This is why the deities born at the time of the winter solstice were known as the light of the world and the divine savior.
This knowledge is written in the stars, in the universe. Celebrating the winter solstice offers us the time to reflect on the greatest mysteries of all of how we came to be, why we are here, and how we can become truly spiritual. Many ancient peoples who have been seen as simple-minded sun worshippers
reallyhad a profound spiritual wisdom that we as a humanity have completely lost touch with. Yet as always, the message of the sun is there ever-present in our lives, and comes to earth to teach humanity in
self-realized people, for those who wish to be born as the children of the sun.
He is a man in the world, but he will rule with me in my kingdom.
He is a man in the world, but he is king in the Light.
He is a man in the world, but he is not one of the world.
And Amen, I say unto you: that man is I and I am that man.
~ Jesus, The Pistis Sophia
CHAPTER FIVE
The Symbolic Meaning of Christmas
There is a profound symbolic meaning to the birth of Jesus at Christmas, which goes further than the religion of Christianity itself. Many see Christmas as a celebration of the actual birth of Jesus based on the Gospels, while others see it as little more than a time of shopping, pleasure, and leisure. What most people don t realize is that the nativity of Jesus is a profoundly significant spiritual teaching in itself, rich with symbolism and containing a timeless spiritual message that was hidden by design so it could survive and reach far into the future.
How to Understand the Meanings
To understand its symbolic meaning, you have to look at Christmas in esoteric terms, where events have symbolic as well as literal meanings. To deeply understand the symbolic meanings requires access to the source of the symbols, which is not to be found in the physical world, but in the world beyond the physical body. That is their source, as it is the source of all symbolism, spiritual myths, and legends. To access the source requires experience beyond the body, by having out-of-body experiences, astral projecting, and to a degree through objective dreams.
Even if you can do that, you won't be able to get the deeper meanings of most symbols if you are not at the personal level of inner spiritual development that can access them. In other words, to get to the hidden meanings you have to be doing the actual work of self-realization that is described in the sacred teachings of the past.
So when we discuss the symbolic meaning of Christmas, you should be aware that it is discussing it in the terms of its source, in a like manner as the ancient peoples themselves, with a common shared esoteric experience and knowledge. This may make it difficult to understand in places, but it's better to give it a fuller description that takes a little extra study to understand, than it is to give a watered down version that everyone can understand right away. The meanings found in Christmas have been watered down so much throughout history that their deeper meanings have mostly been lost, so I felt that it's better to give a more esoteric version, for the sake of completeness and for a more comprehensive understanding.
The Universal Message of Christmas
There is more to Christmas than the birth of a historical person, or the birth of a tremendous spiritual figure. Esoterically speaking, it is about the birth of the Christ, the cosmic Son that is born within a human
the incredible manifestation of the spiritual within.
Christmas is at the third day of the sun seemingly standing still after the winter solstice. It symbolizes the birth of the Christ within a person, whereas the winter solstice symbolizes the birth of the Christ at the beginning of creation.
Through the movement of the sun at the winter solstice, the journey from the universal Christ to the individual Christ is shown.
Christmas day is a celebration of the birth of Jesus for many people, but it is also the time of birth for many spiritual figures in different cultures, and the time of the process of the winter solstice and solstice celebrations.
Although seen as part of different and diverse traditions, they are all related to the same process.
The events of the life of Jesus are echoed in those of other great spiritual teachers and deities from different times and cultures, such as Osiris, Mithras, Krishna, and Quetzalcoatl. Teachings could be understood in a dual way both in what they said, and also through the events of their lives. Each taught awakening, enlightenment, immortality, self-realization, salvation, etc. in what they said, and each showed the process to reach this awakening in the events of their lives. This is why the lives of these deities (and many others) share remarkable similarities.
The sun has a physical and spiritual aspect, and in each it is the giver of light and life. This is why the Christ is referred to as the light of the world.
Ancient sun worship at its root is the worship of the spiritual aspect of the sun, rather than purely the physical one, as for the ancient sun worshippers, the physical sun was a symbol of its spiritual counterpart.
In Christianity the spiritual aspect of the sun has been given the name the Christ. It is not simply a name of Jesus. It is the neutral spiritual force that gave rise to creation a universal divine fire symbolized by the sun, the divine creative light. Christmas celebrates the birth of the Christ within a person.
The Symbols of Christmas
The symbols of the nativity in an esoteric sense relate specifically to the birth of the Christ within an individual, and its preparation.
He was born in a cave where animals were because there was no room for him elsewhere in the city.
He wasn't born amidst even everyday circumstances, but in the lowest place of the city, which shows humility. Those who are concerned with worldly causes overlook him.
He is born as a baby, and helpless, because the Christ when incarnated is small and needs to grow to maturity.
He was born in a cave where animals were kept, which represents the Christ's birth in an individual amongst their animal egos. The Christ comes into a person in who the animal egos live. He works within to destroy those egos. The cave represents the womb of creation. In the multi-dimensional nature of a person, the cave is at the center of the inferior regions of the inner earth.
He is wrapped in basic clothes, meaning that the inner bodies which hold him are in a basic state.
They will later be developed, from solar to golden. He is placed in an animal's feeding trough where the egos feed, in the sexual waters through the layers of the earth within man, in the energies of sex.
At the time of his birth there were shepherds watching their flock. They represent the walkers of the path who are also teachers; their flock is the public. An angel of the Lord appeared to them and the glory of the lord shone around them and announced the birth of Jesus. A heavenly host appeared with the angel saying peace to the people he favors. This represents the incarnation of Atman, the divine spirit within a person, which is a necessary step prior to the incarnation of the Christ. The people whom he favors are the initiates who are prepared inwardly (by incarnating Atman) to receive him. They visit him just after his birth, meaning that they reach to the birth of the Christ within themselves.
The angel of the Lord announcing the birth of Christ to the shepherds.
The star that shone over him represents the self-realized man, one who has reached divinity.
The wise men visit Jesus.
The wise men, who visit him later once he is in a house, represent those who are on the path to awaken who have the Christ within them. They came from the East, or more literally translated from the rising (of the sun). The rising sun symbolizes the birth of the Christ. They worship the baby Jesus, showing that they recognize the Christ. Through the sacrifice of their journey they brought gifts of gold, representing the spirit and divinity, frankincense representing sexual alchemy, and myrrh representing the inner death of the egos. So through sacrifices, by dying to one s egos, and transforming the energies in alchemy, the gold of the spirit is born.
When you put the nativity and what it symbolizes into an overall context of the meaning of the winter solstice and the following days, you discover an extremely profound teaching, describing the process of creation of the universe and at a personal level within an individual.
The Connection to the Winter Solstice
Christmas is celebrated on the 25th of December (Jesus is born at midnight on December 24th), which is three days following the winter solstice. The winter solstice is central to spiritual celebrations throughout the world and has been since ancient times, and there is a reason why Christmas, and the birth of so many solar deities, is connected with it.
The winter solstice is the time of year where the sun has reached its most southerly point on the horizon, and is at its weakest. Thus, it is the darkest time of the year. At the winter solstice, it is as if the sun is born from out of this darkness, beginning to grow, strengthen, and bring light to the world. But the solstice is not just about a natural phenomenon which makes the crops grow, etc. It is a deeply spiritual time which represents the first day of creation and the birth of the Christ: the solstice relating to the birth of the Christ in creation, and Christmas the birth of the Christ within a person.
The three days when the sun seems to "stand still" after the solstice represent the three steps the Christ takes in order to enter an individual. He only enters a person who has advanced enough in their self-realization and has created within themselves the spiritual bodies and has the twin souls and the spirit within.
Most of the symbolism relating to the birth of Jesus can be understood by knowing the meaning of the winter solstice. In fact, to really understand it you need to look into the meaning of the solstice and the process of creation.
For an in depth look at the meaning of creation, see our eBook Return to Source.
The Public Teaching and the Esoteric Teaching
Jesus taught on two levels one, on an exoteric level, which is a public and more basic teaching, and the
other was on an esoteric level, which was a highly advanced spiritual teaching for people who were prepared for it.
On an exoteric level, Jesus was understood as a divine savior who taught us to be better people and died for people s sins so they might believe and be saved. On an esoteric level, Jesus taught how to transform oneself spiritually, to overcome sins, become a son of God, and attain salvation. Many of the parables, events, and teachings of the Gospels have different levels of meaning that were often symbolic.
They can also be found in many of the texts that were kept out of the Bible, such as the Nag Hammadi Library, Pistis Sophia, Gospel of Judas, and Gospel of Mary.
It is obvious that the teaching Jesus gave faced a lot of opposition, both from the government and religious authorities of the time. The esoteric side of the teaching, which was seen as more heretical,
was hidden to protect it from complete destruction (thus Jesus said not to throw pearls before swine, less they turn and tear you to pieces, and that he taught the public in parables). Instead the exoteric side was taken up by the masses and became a religion that passed on the esoteric symbols encoded in the texts it chose to venerate and take around the world, albeit unwittingly.
Despite attempts to protect it, much of the original esoteric literature of Christianity would have been destroyed, and thus we are left with texts which are probably impossible to decipher the actual practical work of spiritual awakening from in and of themselves. Only select texts that were seen as fit some three hundred years after Jesus' death made it into the Bible, at a time when the Church and the Roman state merged, while everything else was ordered to be destroyed since the Church now had the power to enforce its will. Not only were texts destroyed en masse (only a few copies of which have been discovered over the last hundred years, as they had been hidden in order to save them), but people who had the knowledge of what the texts meant were intensively persecuted as well.
The Birth of the World Teacher
Jesus teaching at the Sermon on the Mount.
The Christ not only helps the person that he is born within, but he comes to teach the world. His influence gradually develops as the person develops along the process of self-realization, beginning as a helpless baby, then he grows and matures, until eventually fully merging with the individual. Then he is the world teacher, a light unto the world, the instructor of teachers.
Expressing himself through the ordinary personality of an individual, he brings his wisdom to share, as he has done so many times in the past amongst those who have incarnated him and fully realized him within their psychic/physical/spiritual nature.
Unfortunately however, each time Christ comes the teaching eventually becomes a religion where people await the literal return of Jesus, Viracocha, etc., while the real Christ returns within a person
because of their spiritual work (not their religious beliefs) and is rejected by the world and society, teaching the real esoteric wisdom unbeknownst to and even hated by religious believers who lack the understanding of the real esoteric meaning of the teachings, which formed the basis of their religion.
In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says:
Foolish men, without an understanding of My higher nature as the Supreme Lord of all that exists, disregard Me manifested in the human body.
Viracocha was said to return as a beggar as the Christ is born into a humble person, disguised and unable to be seen by the ordinary observer because of the rags the Christ is clothed in, which is the personality of the individual. In the esoteric Christian text the Acts of Peter and the Twelve Apostles from the Nag Hammadi Library, Jesus gives pearls away to the "beggars" of the city (the pearls are the "pearls of wisdom," the sacred teaching), while he disguises himself from the rich of the city who reject him. The apostles meet him as fellow "strangers" as they are all strangers to the world.
Spiritual Preparation for the Christ
For the Christ to be born, the right inner conditions need to be present. He comes within when performing an esoteric work, at the beginning of the second of three stages called mountains on the path of initiation
and self-realization. The work involves dying to the animal egos, such as pride, lust, greed anger, jealousy, etc.; transforming the energies and creating the spiritual bodies within with the creative energies of sex in alchemy (referred to as "the bridal chamber" in esoteric Christianity); and sacrifice for others in teaching the path to enlightenment. When the Christ is born he works to destroy the egos and to change the nature of the person; as the baby grows he gets stronger and more powerful.
The three days when the sun seems to remain still after the winter solstice signify the three steps of the Christ, which are the three places he inhabits when he incarnates. These are the physical body, the dimension of the soul, and the dimension of the spirit. The way is prepared for this by incarnating the three divine aspects of the Being, the twin souls, and the divine spirit, and creating the four solar bodies in the physical, vital, astral, and mental planes. These are bodies that the divine energy of the Christ manifests through to be present in a person here, as he goes through the dimensions to reach the physical one.
In the second stage of the work bodies of gold replace the four solar bodies, so that they can withstand the voltage of the Christ and he can use them fully. A human being is not normally born with these bodies; they have to be created. In his three steps he enters the physical body, the sixth dimension, and the Atmic region (which is the seventh dimension where the divine spirit resides). He does not enter in the first stage or mountain of the path, but in the second when everything has been prepared. It would be destructive for the inner levels of a person for the Christ to remain in all the regions when he first appears as they are not capable of withstanding his divine voltage. On the second mountain with the creation of bodies of gold and the incarnation of the superior trinity, he can remain in the regions.
To prepare all this requires the creation of the relevant bodies with alchemy (in the bridal chamber ), the raising of the kundalini in each of them, and the initiation to be passed for each, making seven serpents, seven bodies, and seven initiations (there is an eighth initiation which is the result of the previous seven). This is the first of the three mountains, the three pyramids. When this is complete the second begins and the Christ is incarnated. There are seven more initiations (with an eighth as a completion) on the second mountain. Then he grows with each initiation, until reaching maturity at the seventh where he is crucified and dies. With the eighth he resurrects, and this is symbolized in the spring
equinox. He goes through the events that the figures such as Jesus went through in their lives, as their lives symbolized the events and stages of the path of the Christ.
Truth did not come into the world naked, but it came in types and images. The world will not receive truth in any other way. There is a rebirth and an image of rebirth. It is certainly necessary to be born again through the image. Which one? Resurrection. The image must rise again through the image. The bridal chamber and the image must enter through the image into the truth: this is the restoration. Not only must those who produce the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, do so, but have produced them for you. If one does not acquire them, the name ( Christian ) will also be taken from him. But one receives the unction of the [...] of the power of the cross.
This power the apostles called the right and the left. For this person is no longer a Christian but a Christ.
~ The Gospel of Phillip, from The Nag Hammadi Library
The chrism is superior to baptism, for it is from the word "Chrism" that we have been called Christians, certainly not because of the word baptism. And it is because of the chrism that the Christ has his name. For the Father anointed the Son, and the Son anointed the apostles, and the apostles anointed us. He who has been anointed possesses everything. He possesses the resurrection, the light, the cross, the Holy Spirit. The Father gave him this in the bridal chamber; he merely accepted (the gift).
The Father was in the Son and the Son in the Father. This is the Kingdom of Heaven.
~ The Gospel of Phillip, from The Nag Hammadi Library
CHAPTER SIX
Ancient Sacred Sites Aligned to the Winter Solstice
There are hundreds of ancient sites, and were many thousands, that align to the winter solstice. However, the following sites mark this solstice alignment in a symbolic way. By doing so, they have encapsulated a profound esoteric wisdom that can still be grasped even in our modern world outlasting books and texts, which are easily lost and destroyed. These monuments speak to us through thousands of years about the true spiritual significance of the winter solstice.
Someone who understands the symbolic language used to build these sites can see the builders knew the winter solstice was the cosmic embodiment of the process of creation and the birth of the divine Son.
The significance of the birth of divinity pre-dates Christian times, which reveals that spiritual deities born at the winter solstice, such as Jesus, Horus, Krishna, Dionysus, Attis, Mithras, etc., symbolize something much greater which no religion owns exclusively. These sites were built around the universal knowledge of the process of awakening in which the birth of the divine Son within a spiritually prepared individual is a central event.
Glastonbury Tor ~ England
Glastonbury Tor rising out of the mist (photo copyright Edwin Graham, 2007).
This ancient site is undated and unexcavated, and is believed by many to be the mysterious Isle of Avalon from the legend of King Arthur. It is a giant man-made seven-terraced mound, which was once surrounded by water. Today it is topped by a Church tower, which may have been built in place of a much earlier site.
From what appears to be an ancient man-made observation mound on nearby Windmill Hill, someone can watch the winter solstice sun appear at the bottom of the terraces of Glastonbury Tor, and roll up the Northern side of terraces until clipping the top of the tower. In approximately 3,000 BC, only the top rim of the sun would have been visible, allowing someone to observe this incredible event without being blinded by the sun.
The constellation Orion rises over the Tor in the winter months, followed by the star Sirius, which
rises soon after. During the period around 3,150 BC, Sirius rose in the same place as the winter solstice sun. Orion is associated with the Egyptian father god Osiris, and Sirius is associated with his wife, the Egyptian mother goddess Isis. Horus, their son, is associated with the sun, and is born at the winter solstice. Thus at Glastonbury Tor, during the winter solstice someone could witness a cosmic nativity of Father, Mother, and Son, along with the symbolism created by the Tor.
There is said to be a fabled treasure that exists in the very lowest chamber within the inner terraces of the island. The rising sun on the winter solstice connected with the birth of the divine Son at the base of the terraces, reveals what the meaning of this treasure. It is the Golden Fleece, symbol of the Son.
Goseck circle ~ Germany
A diagram of Goseck circle from above. The two yellow lines show the alignment of the winter solstice sunrise and sunset through openings in the circle to reach its center.
The Goseck circle is an ancient Neolithic henge, and lies on the same latitude as Stonehenge. Like Stonehenge, it too had prominent solar alignments to the solstices. It is dated to 5,000 BC and was a series of concentric circles constructed out of wooden posts and ditches. Two of the openings to the circle
aligned to the sunrise and sunset on the winter solstice, funneling the rays of sunlight through wooden posts into the center of the circle.
Nebra Sky Disk ~ Germany
The Nebra Sky Disk. The outer gold rim on the right was also matched by one on the left, which is now missing.
These marked the sunsets and sunrises of the winter and summer solstice. The moon and sun are represented in the middle, and are surrounded by stars, which are believed to represent a number of constellations, including possibly the Pleiades (photo copyright wiki user Anagoria, 2012).
The Nebra Sky Disk is said to be the oldest chart of the heavens in the world. It is dated to 1,600 BC and is made out of bronze with a diagram of the heavens embossed on it in gold, and was made by pre-Celtic people. It was discovered on the hilltop of Mittelberg, which is just twenty-five kilometers away from the location of the Goseck circle above.
Like the Goseck circle, it too marks the dates of the solstice, but the Nebra disk is handheld and transportable. Two arcs which run along either side of the Nebra disk mark the sun's positions at sunrise and sunset on both the winter and summer solstice from Mittelberg hill where it was discovered.
Additionally, if the Nebra disk is laid flat on this hilltop and faced north, one of these arcs points to Brocken mountain, the highest peak of the Harz massif. When viewed Mittelberg hill, the sun sets on the summer solstice precisely behind Brocken mountain.
Chichen Itza ~ Mexico
The pyramid of the feathered serpent (which is a symbol of the union of the earthly and heavenly) at Chichen Itza (photo copyright Claude Belair, 2005).
At an ancient Mayan sacred site called Chichen Itza, there is a pyramid dedicated to Kukulcán, the feathered serpent. At spring and autumn equinoxes the sun creates an undulating pattern of light on the nine terraces of the pyramid to display seven triangles of light which link up with a stone serpent head at its base. As the sun sets on the autumn equinox, the pattern created by the movement and alignment of the sun appears to be of a snake descending down the pyramid steps, and at the spring equinox, it creates the impression of the snake ascending the pyramid.
At the winter solstice the interaction between the sun and the temple is very similar to that of
Glastonbury Tor. When one looks at the western face of the pyramid, the sun appears to climb up the terraces until it rests momentarily directly above the pyramid on the pinnacle of the temple room that sits on top of the pyramid, before beginning its descent down the other side. Like Glastonbury, it s as if the sun rising from the lowest point of the structure ascends the terraces, until crowning the tower.
The Temple of Karnak ~ Egypt
This is the Temple of Horus, but the design of the entrance to the Temple of Karnak follows the same architecture, where the front wall is clearly divided in two from which the sun emerges (photo copyright Steve FE Cameron, 2006).
At the temple of Karnak, known as the most hallowed of places, is the very center of the world dedicated to Amun, where he first brought forth creation. Construction is said to have begun during the Middle Kingdom, dated between 2,055 1,650 BC.
The Goddess Mut is also found at the temple of Karnak in probably one of the most ancient areas of it.
Enclosed in her precinct is a sacred lake in the shape of a crescent, symbolizing the waters of creation
and the womb. Here we have the presence of the father and mother god, at a temple aligned to the winter solstice sunrise, which is the date of the birth of the son.
In Egypt we find incredible symbols that reveal the knowledge of the process of birth and creation.
Even temple architecture symbolized the division of the male and female forces to create the son. The entrance to many temples, including that at the Temple of Karnak, shows a raised wall on the left that lowers over the entrance flanked by a winged solar disk, which then raises to form the right wall. Here is represented the division of the two forces, with the solar disk rising in the middle.
This temple is aligned to the winter solstice sunrise. When the sun rises on this day, it appears between the left and right walls on either side of the entrance. Its rays are then funneled through multiple temple areas, which narrow until reaching the sanctuary of Amun. This sanctuary is reminiscent of a womb, which is penetrated by the creative force to give birth to the divine Son. Interestingly, this sanctuary aligns to the temple of Luxor nearby, which itself is laid to the proportions of a human body.
Sometimes called the Temple of Man, the Luxor temple depicts an annunciation scene in which the God Amun announces to the mother Goddess Mut that she will give birth to a divine child. This site shows pictures of the winter solstice sun rising through the Temple of Karnak.
Both in the Temple of Karnak and Luxor the golden number, phi, and the Fibonacci sequence are found. These sacred numbers are key to the growth and development of all life. In fact, the temple of Karnak was built upon and expanded over hundreds of years, according to the Fibonacci sequence. The entrance to the temple is flanked by rows of giant ram-headed sphinxes, which each hold images of a pharaoh between their paws. The Fibonacci sequence can be found in the growth of a ram s horns, just as it is in a nautilus shell. This temple was dedicated to life, its growth, and creation and was specifically aligned to the winter solstice.
Ram-headed sphinx at the Temple of Karnak with the figure of a pharaoh between its paws (photo copyright Hedwig Storch, 2009).
Newgrange ~ Ireland
Newgrange (photo copyright wiki user Shira, 2006).
Newgrange is a giant one acre mound, resembling a grass-topped temple, said to have been built around 3,200 BC. Once a year, at the winter solstice, the rising sun enters the mound through a specially built roofbox above the main entrance and shines directly along the nineteen-meter-long passage, gradually widening until illuminating the inner chamber for about seventeen minutes. Today the first light enters about four minutes after sunrise, but calculations based on the precession of the Earth show that five thousand years ago first light would have entered exactly at sunrise.
The inner chamber of the mound is laid out in the shape of a cross, and beautiful Neolithic artwork can be found etched into the stone both on the inside and outside of the mound. Particularly prevalent are
spiral designs, including the famous tri-spiral design found inside the chamber. This site has photos of the
artwork inside the chamber.
A diagram of the chamber inside Newgrange showing its cross shape.
Here the symbol of the cross appears in connection with the winter solstice, the time of the birth of the divine Son, long before the birth of Jesus. The cross represents the crossing of male and female forces, which give birth to all life. The tri-spiral symbol also shows the union of three forces of Father, Mother, and Son; positive, negative, and neutral, which give rise to all creation. The single spiral is often referred to as the spiral of life as it shows the expansion of life.
And all of it is enclosed in a mound which appears to be like a great womb of the earth. Just as the birth of Jesus, Mithras, and Viracocha was said to have taken place in a cave, so too at Newgrange the birth of the sun is enacted inside the dark chamber of the mound. As at Glastonbury Tor and the Temple of Karnak, we see the three forces of creation present at the moment of the birth of the divine Son, and the creation of all life on the winter solstice.
Maeshowe, a similarly built and designed mound north of Scotland on the Orkney Islands, also receives a beam of sunlight to its central chamber on the winter solstice.
The Four-handed Moai Statue ~ Easter Island
A lone Maoi statue in the center of the island, at a site called Ahu Huri A Urenga, faces the rising sun on
the winter solstice. Unlike any other statue on the island, it has four hands instead of the usual two. This appears to be no coincidence, as the number four has a symbolic meaning related to the sun and the process of creation. This Maoi is seen as one of the most important astronomical observatories on the island, as it appears that the altar together with five cupules etched on a nearby rock functioned as a
solar-ranging device which marked the winter solstice and possibly the equinoxes.
The Great Pyramids ~ Egypt
Diagram of the Great Pyramid of Egypt showing its interior passages and chambers. Both the ascending passage (leading to what is called the "King's Chamber") and the descending passage (leading down into the subterranean chamber) are at an angle of 26 degrees, 33 minutes, and 54 seconds.
As the sun sets on the winter solstice, the second largest pyramid casts a shadow on the southern face of the Great Pyramid beside it at the same angles as the ascending and descending passages inside the Great Pyramid thus alluding to what's inside. The angle of the shadow and the passages in the Great Pyramid
is 26 degrees, 33 minutes, and 54 seconds, and is the only angle that is produced in the only triangle constructed by means of the golden ratio. This angle was used throughout the design of the site of the Great Pyramids and in Egyptian artwork in relation to the process of spiritual resurrection. It is the divine Son born on the winter solstice that will later resurrect, and so perhaps the illustration of this passage was to symbolize that the journey toward this spiritual resurrection would now begin.
The Sun Gate at Tiwanaku ~ Bolivia
The Sun Gate at Tiwanaku, with the creator god Viracocha featured prominently.
At the ancient sacred city of Tiwankau (also written Tiahuanaco), the rays of the rising sun on the winter solstice pass through a stone entrance called "the Sun Gate" and hit an obelisk directly behind it. The creator god Viracocha is carved into the center of the gate and is surrounded by winged beings. On it are also believed to be the instructions for interpreting a giant wall made of eleven pillars nearby (one of which is lying on the ground) as a solar calendar. When standing at the observation stone, it is said that
one could have seen the sun rise over each of the pillars, depending on the time of year, including at the equinoxes and solstices which you can see in animation here
http://www.atlantisbolivia.org/tiwanaku.htm
Although settlements around Tiwanaku have been dated back as far as 1,500 BC, the dating of the ancient ruins of the city of Tiwanaku have been debated and remain surrounded in controversy. Arthur Posnansky, a respected avocational archaeologist born in Vienna, and the archeoastronomer Rolf Müller, argued that Tiwanaku was constructed at approximately 15,000 BC based upon studies of its astronomical alignments.
Additionally, there are other mysteries surrounding Tiwanaku that seem to indicate the site was constructed at a much earlier date than accepted in mainstream circles. Among these are the ancient myths from throughout the Andean region that tell of its founding and use in a pre-flood time. When the Spanish arrived in South America, the Incas told them that they did not build these ancient cities, but that they moved into them. They stated that they were built by giants and by Viracocha himself. The Tiwanaku people believed that Viracocha created giants to move the massive stones, but that he grew unhappy with them and created a flood to destroy them. This myth parallels many others around the world, which also say that a great flood ended a prior race on earth.
Viracocha was sometimes described as human and also as a god. He is sometimes said to be Caucasian in appearance, with white skin, green emerald colored eyes, a long white robe, and holding a staff, which is not the appearance of an indigenous Incan, leading many to theorize about who Viracocha was and where he came from.
These myths from the Andean region may actually correlate to real events. The massive stone docks of Tiwanaku are ringed with ocean fossils, as it appears the city was used as a seaport, and yet today it rests
miles from water, on an Andean plateau, 13,300 feet above sea level. Stephen Robins, Ph.D., has offered
an explanation for this seeming paradox by discussing a worldwide event that occurred at the end of the
preceding geological epoch called the Pleistocene, around 12 to 13 thousand years ago, which suddenly made many mountain ranges around the world rise up. Studies have also found evidence for a cataclysmic flood that swept the Andean Altiplano Plateau around the same time, and the utensils, tools, and fragments
of human skeletons around the Tiwanaku site are mixed in with the deepest layers of the flood alluvia
indicating possible human use of the site prior to this great flood and adding support to theories that Tiwanaku may date to 12,000 BC or more.
Machu Picchu ~ Peru
The Temple of the Sun at Machu Picchu, which is the circular building that encases a large stone boulder that aligns to the winter solstice sunrise.
At the ancient mountaintop city of Machu Picchu in Peru there is a semi-circular structure called the
"Temple of the Sun" that was constructed around a large boulder. During the winter solstice, the sun shines through the central window and falls upon the stone boulder within while also aligning with the tip of a nearby mountain peak.
Machu Picchu is believed by some to be the domain of the Incan priestesses called the "Virgins of the Sun." Interestingly, the winter solstice is the time in many ancient cultures of the virgin birth of the divine
Son. The priestesses may have been the practitioners of the sacred, sexual practice of alchemy, which gives birth to the solar spiritual force within known as the Christ. The Inca also called themselves the
"Children of the Sun."
Machu Picchu is also home to the Intihuatana stone which aligns to the equinoxes, and the city is situated on a mountain ridge above the Urubamba Valley, which also has a winter solstice alignment as described below.
The Urubamba Sacred Valley ~ The Andes of Peru
Looking over the shoulder of Viracocha at his face in the side of the Ollantaytambo mountain. If you look closely you can see the ruins built on top of his head, forming the crown (photo copyright D. Gordon E. Robertson).
In this sacred valley in the Andes facing the ancient Inca ruins of Ollantaytambo, there is a mountain sacred to the Incas called Cerro Pinkuylluna believed to have the profile of the creator god Viracocha.
The formation, standing at 140 meters high, is made up of indentations that form the eyes and mouth, whilst a protruding carved rock makes his nose. Inca ruins built on top of the face are considered to represent a crown on his head. When the sun strikes the profile of Viracocha during the winter solstice, the mineral content of the mountain reflects and refracts the rays.
In the legends of the pre-Inca and Inca people, the creator sun god Viracocha, who is depicted with a crown of the sun, is said to have risen from Lake Titicaca (or sometimes the cave of Pacaritambo) during the time of darkness to bring forth light. Viracocha is said to have made the earth, the stars, the sky, and mankind. Here Viracocha, who is associated with the sites of Tiwanaku and the Urubamba Sacred Valley at the winter solstice, is also associated with the sun and creation. In his emergence from the lake, we see the birth of the divine Son from the primordial waters. It was said that he wandered the earth disguised as a beggar, teaching his new creations the basics of civilization, as well as working numerous miracles (just as Jesus did). He wept when he saw the plight of the creatures he had created, and it was thought that he would re-appear in times of trouble (just as other divine saviors such as Jesus, Mithras, and the avatars of Vishnu, etc., are believed to).
Ajanta Caves ~ India
The cave at Ajanta called number nineteen, which aligns with the winter solstice sunrise (photo copyright Ekta Abhishek Bansal, 2012).
The Ajanta Caves are an extraordinary group of around thirty man-made caves cut into the side of a sheer cliff face. The cliff is naturally U-shaped and was hidden in a remote part of the jungle. The caves are believed to have been built by Buddhist monks by carving into the cliff face what they created were elaborate shrines and temples, all cut into one single giant rock.
Work is believed to have begun on the caves in around 200 BC and ended around AD 480 650. The caves contained sculptures and artwork centered around the life of Buddha.
Two of the caves align to celestial events.
Cave nineteen aligns to the winter solstice sunrise. It contains a statue of Buddha standing within a stupa, which is illuminated by the rays of the rising sun on the winter solstice.
Cave twenty-six aligns to the summer solstice sunrise. It contains a statue of Buddha seated within a stupa, which is illuminated by the rays of the rising sun on the summer solstice.
A stupa is a symbolic monument which it is said Buddha uses to ascend and descend. The stupas for the winter and summer solstice at the Ajanta Caves differ in their design, perhaps for a symbolic reason.
Great Zimbabwe ~ Zimbabwe, Africa
The ruins of Great Zimbabwe. The large circular structure is called the Great Enclosure, which is surrounded by various other ruins in the landscape.
In sub-Saharan Africa there lies the impressive stone ruins of an abandoned ancient city. No written records were left behind which explain why it was built nor its history, but it was believed to have been built in around AD 1,100 1,400 by indigenous peoples.
A number of stone monoliths at the site line up with certain bright stars in the constellation Orion as they rise on the morning of the winter solstice. Perhaps this was intended to signify the birth of the divine Son the Christ, Orion/Osiris, who is born on the winter solstice?
Nazca Lines ~ Peru
The giant figure known as the astronaut as seen on the side of a mountain from the air at the site known as the Nazca Lines (photo copyright Raymond Ostertag, 2007).
In the Nazca Desert in southern Peru, hundreds of giant lines and figures were drawn into the ground by removing the layers of red desert pebbles to expose the white soil beneath. One figure has been called an astronaut because of how similar it looks to one, and because the figures are best viewed from the sky.
This has led some to theorize that the builders of the lines could have been in contact with extra-terrestrials.
A number of the lines also align to the winter and summer solstices, along with other figures that could have aligned to the constellation of Orion. The lines themselves are not able to be dated, so it is
difficult to determine when they aligned to celestial movements as due to the precession of the equinoxes, these alignments shift over time. However, on the winter solstice the sun sets over one line, exactly between the sixth and first century BC (scroll down this page to see a photograph).
The Nazca culture of the area however, was only active from 100 BC to AD 1 onward, so did their very early culture or an earlier peoples first begin creating these lines? Horrifically, the Nazca culture practiced human decapitation, which apparently dramatically increased from about AD 450, suggesting that this culture may have built and expanded upon a pre-existing site or inherited knowledge from another peoples who were more advanced.
Dr Paul Kosok, who first discovered their astronomical link, called the Nazca Lines "the largest astronomy book in the world." The native name for the site is "Intiwatana," which means "the place to where the sun is tied," indicating its cosmological link. Just as the Egyptians wished to create a link between heaven and earth when they mirrored the cosmic "duat" with their ancient sites, such as the constellation Orion with the Great Pyramids, so too did the creators of this site. Incredibly, the Nazca Lines lie along the same line around the earth as the Great Pyramids of Egypt, as well as Machu Picchu and Easter Island, within a margin of error of less than one tenth of one degree of latitude and all these sites have alignments to the solstices and equinoxes and most to the constellation of Orion. This begs the question are these sites all connected, and what can then tell us as a humanity about the cosmic spirituality they all seem to venerate?
Mynydd Dinas ~ Rhondda, Wales
The sacred mountain of Mynydd Dinas to the Druids, where they would watch the sun rise over its peak at the winter solstice (photo copyright wiki user ceridwen, 2009).
According to local tradition, the ancient Druids used to gather every winter solstice to watch the sunrise on the winter solstice over the mountain called Mynydd Dinas believed to be their sacred mountain Morganwg. They believed the sun god Hu Gadarn was born as a baby boy, and would grow as the year progressed toward the summer solstice. Later the Romans celebrated the birth of Mithras and Christians the birth of Jesus at the winter solstice, and yet both had their influence upon the destruction of the Druid traditions.
Also nearby the Dinas Mountain in Wales there is a cave that goes by a Welsh name meaning Voice of God where the Druids enacted the birth of their solar god Hu Gadarn (the Mabyn Taliesun) from within the cave. The Druid priest acting as Hu Gadarn gave a loud musical shout to which the gathered crowds would reply Ein Hoes, meaning Our Life!
Angkor Wat ~ Cambodia
A model of the temple of Angkor Wat, with its layout incorporating cruciform shapes. The center of the temple receives shafts of light on the winter solstice (photo copyright wiki user Heron, 2004).
At the giant Hindu temple complex of Angkor Wat, shafts of light shine on the exact geometric center of the Preau Cruciforme on the winter solstice. The temple is dedicated to the Hindu god Vishnu and is laid out in a cruciform shape, a shape that is incredibly significant to the time of the winter solstice and the birth of the divine Son/sun, not only to the Christians, but also in the ancient sites and traditions of the Britons and Druids.
The cross is also an alchemical symbol the union of male (vertical) and female (horizontal) forces gives spiritual birth to the divine child within. At Angkor Wat the light of the sun shines on the cross on the winter solstice, just as it does within the cruciform chamber of Newrange in Ireland.
SPRING EQUINOX
Resurrection and Re-integration with the Spiritual
Mother
CHAPTER SEVEN
The Spiritual Meaning of the Spring Equinox
Painting of the Mayan Maize God Hun Hunaphu resurrecting from a turtle from a temple painting at the ancient city of Palenque in Yucatan, Mexico (L. Schele and P. Mathews, The Code of Kings: The Language of Seven Sacred
Maya
Temples
and
Tombs
1998.
13-03-2012.
http://research.famsi.org/schele_list.php?
_allSearch=IMG0051.jpg&title=Linda%20Schele%20Drawings%20Collection&tab=schele)
The spring equinox (also known as the vernal equinox) is the time in the earth s annual cycle around the sun in which day and night are equal in length, before the days finally start to get longer after the dominance of darkness during winter, and life springs forth from death. Its deeper spiritual significance reveals the mysteries of spiritual resurrection.
In Christianity, the spring equinox is the time of the passion, crucifixion, and resurrection of Jesus.
Likewise in ancient Egypt, it is the time of the resurrection of the ancient Egyptian god Osiris; and the resurrection of the Mayan Maize God Hun Hunahpu. The Great Sphinx of Giza, in Egypt, symbol of resurrection, gazes precisely at the rising of the spring equinox sun. The temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia aligns to the spring equinox, and depicts the scene of the churning of the milky ocean the struggle between the forces of light and darkness. At the temple of the feathered serpent in Mexico at Chichen Itza, the feathered serpent Quetzalcoatl ascends the nine terraces of the pyramid on the spring equinox.
Throughout the world, the spring equinox is a time of great confrontation between the forces of darkness and light, in the death and resurrection of the central deities of sacred teachings throughout the world. It symbolizes what an initiate goes through in a definitive and important stage of self-realization, where the struggle between darkness and light creates the opposition needed to attain immortality. This is symbolized by the dark half of the year on one side of the spring equinox sun, and the light half of the year on the other.
The Great Struggle between Light and Darkness in the Churning of the Milky Ocean
Painting of the famous scene of the churning of the milky ocean. All the treasures that have emerged from the ocean surround Vishnu, sitting atop the lotus.
The spring equinox stands upon the point of balance, upon which everything pivots in its motion, in the universe, in the cycles of the seasons, and within ourselves. On one side of the equinox is the dark half of the year, and on the other the light half, representing the struggle between the forces of darkness (death and decay) and light (birth and life). It is this antithesis that gives motion to all cycles in the universe, and which is likewise found in the spiritual work to awaken. This is why Jesus, Osiris, Quetzalcoatl, etc., faced their greatest confrontation with darkness to attain the light at the spring equinox.
This universal principle is illustrated at the temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia, which aligns to the spring equinox. It portrays the ancient sacred Hindu teaching from the epic the Mahabharata of the churning of the milky ocean in a giant representation on its walls, and in the design of its temple complex
which incorporates the sun and the stars as celestial counterparts of the story.
The story of the churning of the milky ocean, as explained below, shows the fundamental principles that underpin the cycles of the sun throughout the seasons, the cycle of our earth through what is called the precession of the equinoxes, the turn of the Wheel of Life, the cycles of humanity called Yugas, and the inner spiritual process called resurrection.
The Churning of the Milky Ocean
The central segment of the mural of the churning of the milky ocean at Angkor Wat. Vishnu is the large central figure above him is Indra, below him the turtle in the ocean, and on either side the demons and devas pulling (photo copyright wiki user Markalexander100 2005).
The giant stone mural of the churning of the milky ocean at Angkor Wat depicts the asuras (demons) and devas (angels) as being in a tug of war. They each hold one end of a massive serpent, which is wrapped around a sacred mountain and balanced on a turtle swimming in the great milky ocean. As the demons and
devas pull back and forth, they rotate the mountain which churns the milky ocean below. The god Vishnu stands at the mountain, which is the point of rotation, and the god Indra is above in the sky.
The story is also depicted through the design of the temple itself and its alignment to the sun and stars.
On the spring equinox, the sun rises to crown the pinnacle of the main tower of Angkor Wat, which is symbolic of Mount Meru, home of the gods representing Indra (as the sun) rising into the sky to return to his abode as the King of Heaven. In 10,500 BC Angkor Wat and a number of surrounding temples aligned to the constellation Draco, which is the celestial depiction of the great serpent wrapped around the mountain.
The Cycle of the Sun
There are ninety-one demons to the left, which are the days between the winter solstice and the spring equinox, and eighty-eight devas to the right who are joined by Vishnu, Indra, and Kurma (the turtle incarnation of Vishnu), which are the days between the spring equinox and summer solstice. The point of balance is the spring equinox. The pull of the serpent toward the demons, and then back toward the devas, symbolizes the movement of the sun (represented by Vishnu) into the dark half of the year, to reach the extreme of the darkest day on the winter solstice, then returning until crossing the point of rotation (the equinox) to travel toward the opposite extreme of the longest day on the summer solstice, and back again.
The Precession of the Equinoxes
The design of the mural also depicts greater cosmic cycles which our earth progresses through. It encodes the numbers of the precession of our earth through the constellations, referred to as the precession of the equinoxes. Approximately every 2,150 years the sun on the spring equinox rises in a different constellation, and an entire cycle throughout all the constellations takes approximately 26,000 years. Like
in the annual cycle of the sun, in this cycle also, the spring equinox is the point of rotation.
The Wheel of Samsara and Yugas
A painting of the Wheel of Samsara in the Sera Monastery of Tibet. Notice the light and dark halves of the middle of the wheel, through which life rotates. (photo copyright Philipp Roelli, 2005) Human existence also has greater cycles, just as our earth does, which progress through cycles of death and rebirth. These cycles have been illustrated in Buddhism as the Wheel of Life (known as the Wheel of Samsara). Like the dark and light half of the year found in the change of seasons from summer to spring, the Wheel of Samsara also has its periods of light and darkness. As the wheel rotates up it is in light, called evolution, and as it rotates down, it is in darkness, called devolution. Within the Wheel of Samsara is found the progress of the person through the cycles of life, with the forces of light urging the person to
awaken, and the forces of darkness dragging the person into the Abyss. This same rotation is found in the cycles of humanity known as Yugas, which were also encoded in the temple of Angkor Wat whole civilizations and periods of human existence go through periods of light and progress, as well as darkness and degeneration.
The Struggle in the Individual and in the World
This pulling back and forth between light and darkness symbolizes an underpinning universal principle in creation found in the cycles of cosmic time and human life. It reveals the role of darkness and light in creating movement through its struggle and opposition. But this also shows the role of darkness and light within ourselves and our lives.
This same struggle between the forces of good and evil takes place within the world, even though most people are completely unaware of it. In life, one is either taking part in this struggle or they are simply the unconscious victims of it. If one is in the struggle, they are either fighting for light, or for darkness. Those who do neither, who do not fight, who do not struggle against darkness, are simply as the creatures of the ocean of existence that become churned to pieces from the churning the struggle produces.
The Treasures
In the churning of the milky ocean, the struggle between darkness and light causes multiple spiritual treasures to emerge from the ocean, a poison that has the power to destroy the universe, and finally produces Amrita the nectar of immortality. Without the opposition that darkness brings, there would be no movement and no struggle, and it is from the struggle that the spiritual treasures are produced. The spiritual treasures symbolize the spiritual faculties and virtues which the initiate gains through their struggle against darkness.
The Poison
Shiva at the top of the churning of the milky ocean, swallowing the poison. Beneath him various treasures emerge from the ocean (photo copyright wiki user elishams, 2006).
The poison that the churning produces is called Kalakuta it is so terrible that it threatens to destroy creation. Before the nectar can be recovered in the story, this terrible poison must be dealt with first.
The opposition found in life not only brings out the best in people, but also the very worst, and thus opposition also creates poison.
As this is a core principle it works on many levels. In society for example poison emerges as negative actions and psychological reactions, in the practice of sexual alchemy as lustful desire, and within the individual as the responses of the many subconscious states and the actions that result from these states.
It could be said that the act of churning brings out the poison, and therefore separates it from the nectar. The ocean is life, the human psyche, and all of creation, and to have the poison extracted from it and separated from the nectar is of great value as it allows a process of purification to take place. In the work to awaken, one must be constantly struggling to purify oneself to remove what is inferior and cultivate what is superior, and it is from the struggle that opposition produces that allows this to happen.
The poison within, all the hatred, violence, greed, etc. is brought forth from the struggle both within the individuals subconscious and externally within the world. The strength of the egos (emotions such as anger, hatred, etc.) stirred up is so great that it threatens to destroy everything that is good within and the world.
For someone doing the spiritual work, the person has to face what is within the depths of their subconscious. When the psyche is churned by the agitation created by opposition, they get to see what is really within them all the egos that were previously hidden beneath the surface of the ocean (the psyche and subconscious), but which can now be extracted and destroyed. Also, when the events of life are churned, those who are of the ego are separated from those who are for light. The opposition gives rise to the land of action, where knowledge is found and intelligent deeds can be made.
In the story of the churning of the milky ocean, the devas have to ask for help to be saved from the poison. The god Shiva comes forth and swallows the poison as an act of self-sacrifice to save creation and allow the churning to continue.
In the events in the world, people of higher consciousness who see and understand the terrible consequences of the egos of others take it upon themselves to bear their ill effects in an act of self-sacrifice in their lives, which they do for the good of the world. Even though Shiva swallowed the poison, his wife stops the poison from traveling past his throat. This is the intervention of the Mother of the universe, who protects us and the whole of creation from being ultimately destroyed by evil.
The Nectar
Finally the nectar, the positive results of the struggle, emerges. Out of opposition comes the nectar of knowledge, understanding, wisdom, information, right action, good events, and what is of value in life to those who are working for greater consciousness.
In alchemy the elixir of immortality arises that which the devas set out to achieve in the churning, which grants resurrection.
This struggle to acquire the nectar shows the important role that darkness plays in the awakening of the individual. It is in the opposition to darkness that one is tested, one develops strength, self-knowledge, will, wisdom, and many other qualities, and why before Jesus, Osiris, Quetzalcoatl, Attis, Tammuz, etc.
resurrect and attain eternal life at the spring equinox, they must firstly face darkness as the betrayal, crucifixion, and death. Jesus, like Shiva, had to bear the worst of human behavior in an act of self-sacrifice, so that evil could be brought out and exposed for the good of humanity.
The Role of Spiritual Help
While the demons are greater in number than the devas, the devas numbers are made up by the gods Vishnu, Indra, and Kurma, revealing that those who fight for good, though appearing weaker in the world, are helped by the spirit and those with the spirit always win.
The demons try to steal the nectar of immortality using cunning and deceit, but instead fall victim to their own inner weakness, which is lust and sexual desire, and are distracted by an attractive woman sent by Vishnu. Instead, through the help of the god Vishnu, the elixir is then seized and consumed by the devas which gives them the strength to defeat the demons, and allows Indra (the initiate with the Son within) to return to his abode as the King of Heaven. This is symbolic of the resurrection of the Son. In the story, the defeat of the demons was only possible through Vishnu s intervention, and thus without Vishnu's help, Indra would not have been able to return to heaven.
This reveals that the forces of evil in creation, within ourselves, and in the world would always dominate those of good through the use of cunning and deceit, if it wasn t for spiritual help. Jesus, Osiris, Krishna, and Hun Hunahpu are all killed through deceit and betrayal. But as Jesus said, without the will of his Father, he would never have been betrayed and handed over to death in the first place. It is the spirit that allows darkness its place in creation because of the opposition it provides. Vishnu promised the devas that they would have the nectar from the beginning, but that they had to first churn the ocean alongside the demons to acquire it.
Do you refuse to speak to me? Pilate said. Don t you realize I have power either to free you or to crucify you?
Jesus answered, You would have no power over me if it were not given to you from above.
The Necessity of Darkness
The Aztec god Xolotl (depicted with the head of a dog and body of a man), the twin brother of Quetzalcoatl, is illustrated as being on a cross. Other images show Quetzalcoatl himself on the cross, vast distances away from where Jesus was crucified.
The forces of darkness, evil, death, and decay are found throughout all of creation, in our lives, and within ourselves, as well as the forces of light, goodness, birth, and growth. All form that we see is made perceptible through the combination of both light and shadow if there were only darkness, or only light, we could not see. Dark and light both form a necessary part of creation, and also a necessary part of the spiritual work.
In the spiritual work, the initiate fights against the darkness within themselves in their own subconscious and in the world, so that the light of the spirit triumphs within them. This great struggle was depicted in the life of Jesus, Osiris, Krishna, Hun Hunahpu, and many others at the time of the spring equinox symbolic of the battle between light and darkness.
Many teachings and philosophies today however, wish to focus only on the positive and the feel good. Darkness and evil is either ignored, or worse, embraced. When what feels good is used as the measure for what is spiritual, then there is an avoidance of the truth and superficial beliefs are created on the whims of feelings and emotions. Thus, things like hell, which have been taught about in all great sacred teachings since ancient times, are virtually a subject of taboo. Religions on the other hand, have turned what were esoteric teachings intended for individuals to use to attain the divine, into idols of worship, dogma, and beliefs.
Between the commercial gurus of today and the world s religions, the understanding of the processes involved in spiritual awakening and human existence is virtually lost. However, the real esoteric knowledge is still here today, and going back into the original esoteric teachings and the understanding of the cosmos and creation, one can see it has also been given throughout history.
The attainment of spirituality is not done as some today would suggest simply by realizing it; nor is it done simply through a belief and the death of the physical body, as many religions teach. The spirit within, which gives eternal life, is reached only by those who are prepared to go through great trials, tests, and suffering to give up all earthly pleasures, riches, fame, etc. for the treasures of the spirit, which are everlasting. This is demonstrated in the teachings of betrayal, death, and resurrection, found throughout the world, which an initiate must pass through.
The Traps
The Jews Took up Rocks to Stone Jesus, by James Tissot.
In order for everything that occurs at the betrayal and death to unfold, and thus the resurrection, a series of traps must be laid to ensnare the initiate. They are set from multiple circumstances in life, well in advance of the death and resurrection, and then are brought together to form an inescapable snare. These ensure that the necessary circumstances in the life of the initiate will occur they are set by both the forces of evil, who always oppose those who wish to awaken, and also by the divine beings, who move the circumstances and people in the initiate s life for them to be tested.
Keeping a close watch on him, they [the Pharisees] sent spies, who pretended to be sincere. They hoped to catch Jesus in something he said, so that they might hand him over to the power and authority of the governor.
~ Luke 20:20, The Bible
Then the Pharisees went out and laid plans to trap him [Jesus] in his words.
~ Matthew 22:15, The Bible
In the life of Jesus and Osiris, traps are set for them by plotting people who use cunning and deceit in order to kill them. The Lords of Xibalba (of death and darkness) kill Hun Hunahpu using cunning and deceit. Osiris jealous brother, Seth, makes a coffin and tricks Osiris into lying in it to see if he will fit, then seals it shut once Osiris is inside with molten metal so Osiris can t get out. In the life of Jesus, the Pharisees, the religious authorities, conspire to trap Jesus from early on and he is betrayed through deceit.
In the churning of the milky ocean, the demons steal the elixir of immortality using deceit.
These are the traps set by the people of the world who oppose the Son. The force of the Son is love. It comes into the world through a spiritually prepared person, and each time it does, hatred rises to meet it.
Inevitably, the initiate who has the Son within has to face the hatred and evil of the world.
It is not as many people think the Son doesn t come to affirm people s own ideas and beliefs, but challenges the evil that lies veiled within morality, the law, the human being, and society, and in doing so becomes an obstacle to people fulfilling their desires, egos, pleasures, lusts, power, violence, and domination. Osiris was a good king who ruled with love and justice, but Seth was jealous and wanted to rule in his place. Jesus came to give the message of divine truth, but the established religion saw him as a threat to their power.
[Jesus said] This is the verdict: Light has come into the world, but people loved darkness instead of light because their deeds were evil. Everyone who does evil hates the light, and will not come into the light for fear that their deeds will be exposed. But whoever lives by the truth comes into the light, so that it may be seen plainly that what they have done has been done in the sight of God.
~ John 3:19-21, The Bible
Those in society, who appear to be spiritual, moral, religious, sanctified, and righteous, are revealed for what they are as the light of the Son shines in the darkness of the world, it inevitably exposes their true nature. Those in the world who are full of hate come to attack the Son because their vibration is of
hatred, and darkness, and they cannot stand the emanations of light and love, nor their deeds being exposed. Evil does its work in the cover of darkness. One by one, as they come out to attack the Son/Christ, their own inner evil is revealed. In what is about to unfold, all the people around the Son, even society and the world itself, will be defined. It is only through the interaction of both light and dark that we can see. The Son is fire and light, just as the sun, and shines into the darkness.
In this stage the initiate is caught by a multitude of traps, set by both demons and the divine law from which there is no escape, and which came at no fault of their own. The spiritual path is set by the spirit, and so they make sure the initiate is caught in traps so that they will go through the required stage. They must go through the betrayal, an excruciating stage in which they are handed over to people who hate them, who ruthlessly destroy their image and reputation with lies and falsity.
Betrayal
Judas leaving the last supper to betray Jesus.
The Christ, the Son, is always betrayed and handed over to the people in the world that hate him; evil always uses deceit to destroy good in the world. For Osiris, he was betrayed by his brother someone who was a trusted part of his family; and for Jesus, it was his disciple Judas, someone he taught and shared his life with, who handed him over to the Pharisees.
Joan of Arc had attained a certain stage of the spiritual work, and as part of her mission came here to complete a part of it that stage was the betrayal. In her life she was betrayed by the King of France, the very person whom she had helped to put on the throne, and was handed over by him to her enemies the English who took her prisoner and put her on trial.
Krishna was killed by the arrows of a person whom he had revealed the crimes of. In revenge, this traitor, knowing Krishna would be at the river at a certain time, came to assassinate him with a troop they
had gathered together. Likewise, Judas brought a group of soldiers to Jesus, and Seth had seventy-two conspirators these are the people who hate the initiate, the Son, and have been looking for an opportunity to attack.
In the Garden of Gethsemane as Jesus prays knowing that people are plotting against him, the disciples sleep, signifying that their consciousness is asleep and thus how they are unaware of what is taking place.
[Jesus says] My Father! If it is possible, let this cup pass from Me. Yet not as I will, but as You will.
~ Matthew 26:39, The Bible
The initiate s faith in the divine is tested, as all the authorities of the world will turn against them and those who they thought were with them, will desert them completely. When Jesus is seized, the disciples flee. All the students of the initiate, who like Peter, even declare they will do anything for Jesus, when the time comes to stand by their teacher, hide and deny that they even know them in fear of being attacked themselves. Apart from a few disciples, Jesus mother, and Mary Magdalene, the crowds who once massed around Jesus crying Hosanna! completely abandon him. Weak, vulnerable, and almost completely alone, the initiate must face the condemnation, insults, and scourging of the world.
The Divine Role of Judas
Judas betrays Jesus with a kiss, and hands him over to the soldiers.
Jesus was someone already awakened who was born on earth with a mission to give the universal teaching of spirituality anew both in what he taught and through the events of his life. Those around him, both consciously and unconsciously, played a role in Jesus life that would help to demonstrate this teaching. Judas was given the most difficult role by Jesus as his most advanced disciple (see the ancient text The Gospel of Judas and book The Flight of the Feathered Serpent by Armando Cosani).
Judas symbolizes the traitor which exists within every human being, and who betrays the force of the Son all the love, wisdom, happiness, treasures, and riches of the spirit in return for thirty pieces of silver. The silver is symbolic of the pleasures, riches, and desires of the egos, and the material world, which are spent in passing to leave someone at the end of their life with nothing but a sickening remorse
and the consequences of their actions.
In one of the Gospels Judas dies by hanging himself. The symbol of Judas hanging signifies the student/disciple who betrays the initiate with the Son within, as well as on a more personal level, the initiates who having the Son within, exchange him for pleasures of the world (which can happen at different times and in different ways). As they hang, their feet do not touch the ground because they can no longer enjoy the ignorant pleasure of mundane life. Nor does their head reach through heaven, because they rejected and betrayed the spirit. Instead, they are left suspended, without the happiness of a material nor spiritual life.
Judas also represents the force of desire within the psyche, which through self-deceit, betrays all that is good within a person. Through what appears as a harmless desire, the person is handed over to all the evil inside, sliding into the vices of the egos and the world, losing the spiritual within as they exchange it for the behavior that pleasures lead to. Esoterically, the work of Judas is the work to destroy the egos, and it is at this time that the initiate must carry out this work in order to achieve the inner death necessary to resurrect.
Trial
Joan of Arc is interrogated in prison.
Defenseless, the initiate is symbolically taken captive and treated as a criminal after everything they have done to help people. Joan of Arc, who was the savior of a nation, was handed over and kept as a common prisoner, almost completely abandoned at the time of her greatest need by all those who had followed her on the battlefield, except for a handful of loyal comrades.
The members of Jesus own religion sought to destroy him by finding him guilty before the authorities of the day. It was Osiris own brother and members of his own court that conspired against him. And for Joan of Arc, it was her own King and country that gave her over to the English.
Jesus is left defenseless, at the mercy of those who hate the Christ, and remains silent at the false accusations made against him to signify how the initiate is made unable to defend themselves during this time. Like Osiris who was sealed in the coffin, the initiate is left completely trapped, unable to defend
themselves in the face of their own demise. Many of those whom they knew and helped, instead emerge to give false testimony against them.
The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for evidence against Jesus so that they could put him to death, but they did not find any. Many testified falsely against him, but their statements did not agree.
Then some stood up and gave this false testimony against him: We heard him say,
I will destroy this temple made with human hands and in three days will build another, not made with hands. Yet even then their testimony did not agree.
Then the high priest stood up before them and asked Jesus, Are you not going to answer? What is this testimony that these men are bringing against you? But Jesus remained silent and gave no answer. Again the high priest asked him, Are you the Messiah, the Son of the Blessed One?
I am, said Jesus. And you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Mighty One and coming on the clouds of heaven.
The high priest tore his clothes. Why do we need any more witnesses? he asked.
You have heard the blasphemy. What do you think?
They all condemned him as worthy of death. Then some began to spit at him; they blindfolded him, struck him with their fists, and said, Prophesy! And the guards took him and beat him.
~ Mark 14:55-64, The Bible
Jesus before Pilate.
Both Jesus and Joan of Arc are treated as criminals and put on trial by the religious establishment.
The initiate must be rejected by their own religion, and in rejecting the Christ/Son (the real source of spirituality in the world), the religion defines itself as that which opposes the Son no matter what they preach.
The religious Pharisees are unable to find any charge against Jesus or Joan as they did no wrong, despite all the false evidence. However, both are finally accused of blasphemy/heresy (today it is cult leader or heretic) as they dared to declare their relationship with divinity, which they had only done for the good of helping others. The Son comes into the initiate as the world teacher, and has done so throughout time to bring the message of awakening to humanity and for this they are persecuted, attacked, mocked, and hated by those who cling fanatically to religions.
Through the trial of the Son, the true nature of society is revealed, with all its institutions, dogmas, morality, and laws, which appear to be the good of the world, but are instead the vehicles of great evil and which are actually used to destroy the truly spiritual. The crowds of humanity call for the release of Barabbas instead of Jesus a real criminal who is symbolic of all the degeneration of the ego, which they choose over the love of the Son.
The initiate undergoes the flagellation in which they feel every word of the mockery and insults made against them like the lashes of a whip. Then, they receive the crown of thorns, which is Christic will, before being sent again to be condemned by society who shout crucify him! That is, humanity at large hates and rejects the Son, and anyone who has the spiritual force of the Son within.
Crucifixion and Alchemical Transformation
The death of the Son on a cross is a sacred symbol found throughout the world. Jesus was crucified on a cross, and so was Quetzalcoatl. Krishna was tied to a tree by his murderers, which some say was in the shape of a cross. Attis was said to be crucified on a pine tree at the time of the spring equinox; the Maize God Hun Hunahpu was decapitated and his head hung on a tree; Osiris in a coffin, floated down the river Nile until washing ashore and merging with a tree.
The cross is an alchemical symbol and the tree is a symbol of the Tree of Life or World Tree. The symbols of both cross and tree are found prolifically in sacred teachings throughout the world and both symbolize the union of feminine/earthly and masculine/heavenly forces of the human with the divine.
The crucifixion/decapitation symbolizes the beginning of a time of death. The death of resurrection is not a physical death, but an inner one. It is often symbolized as death itself, and why death appears so prominently in ancient sacred teachings and the lives of those deities who gave them.
Jesus crucified between the good and the bad thief.
Jesus was crucified on the Skull Place, where three crosses stood one for Jesus, and on either side, for the bad and good thief. Quetzalcoatl was also depicted as nailed to a cross with two thieves crucified beside him. This configuration is also paralleled at the Great Pyramids of Giza, sometimes called the Necropolis, which is a place of the dead, and in Teotihuacán in Mexico, where three pyramids are built along the Avenue of the Dead, which was known as the place where men become Gods.
At around 10,500 BC the Great Pyramids aligned with the three stars of Orion s belt symbol of Osiris in the sky, god of death and resurrection. Many other ancient sacred sites throughout the world also aligned to the three stars of Orion s belt, such as a number of Neolithic stone circles across England, and the stone villages of the Hopi people of North America, indicating their esoteric importance. Incredibly, the three great pyramids of Teotihuacán in Mexico, along the Avenue of the Dead, align just as the Great
Pyramids of Giza do to the three stars of Orion s belt. The largest, called The Pyramid of the Sun, shares almost exactly the same base area as the Great Pyramid in Egypt.
Before they were stripped of their casing, the Great Pyramids were each different colors, and evidence for this remains today. The smallest pyramid was colored black; the second largest, linked to the sphinx by a causeway, was red; and the largest was white, tipped with gold. The pyramids have a number of meanings, but in one the black pyramid represents the bad thief, and the white, the good thief, with the red in between the Christ (red is the symbolic color of the Christ).
The cross Jesus is crucified on is a sexual alchemical symbol, showing the union of the male phallus represented by the vertical line, with the female uterus, represented by the horizontal. There are also depictions of Egyptian deities feeding initiates the Ankh, the Egyptian cross known as the key of life, signifying the work of sexual alchemy as that which really gives spiritual life.
Alchemy is the purification and transformation of the energies of the human being, turning them from a dirty, dark state, symbolized by lead and the black pyramid, into a pure, light state, symbolized by the gold that once formed the tip of the Great Pyramid.
The constellation of Orion, symbol of Osiris, has a sword. However, due it its position, is also believed to symbolize the phallus, and its brightest star is a nebula known for creating stars. It is in the work of alchemy that the sexual energies are used to create the imperishability of the spirit, just as the phallus of Orion creates stars which were symbols of imperishability in ancient Egypt.
The bad and good thief are also symbolized in the two dogs of Orion, which form the constellations Canis Minor and Canis Major at his heels. The bad takes the sexual energy to use it to feed pleasure, while the good takes it to feed the bliss of the spirit. The constellation Canis Major also contains the star Sirius, which was the star of Isis to the Egyptians. Isis is the spiritual Mother who works with the sexual energies of the initiate to create the spiritual within.
The bad and good thief, and black and white pyramid on either side of the Christ (the red pyramid), symbolize the battle between the sexual urge and the will, mirrored in the sky at the time of the spring equinox when the struggle between darkness and light are in balance. This symbol is found in the Hindu story of the churning of the milky ocean, as explained above, in the struggle between the demons (the force
of the bad thief, desire) on one side, and the devas (the force of the good thief, the spirit) on the other. In order to resurrect, the bliss of the spirit must triumph over sexual desire, just as the days become longer from the point of spring equinox onward.
The Angelic Women
Isis and Nephthys as the angelic women, who come with herbal remedies to embalm the dead body of Osiris (photo copyright Francesco Gasparetti, 2006).
In the life of Osiris, it is Isis and Nephthys who use unguents and rare herbs to embalm the dead body of Osiris, just as Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James bring spices and perfumes to anoint the dead body of Jesus. During Jesus crucifixion, a group of women followers, including these two Marys, watch from a distance as it is during this time that the initiate must be left to symbolically die, completely alone. These women represent the angelic women who then come to surround and help the initiate, once they are symbolically dead. It is the feminine aspect of divinity that will bring the initiate back to life.
Anubis, Guardian of the Necropolis
Anubis attending the dead.
In ancient Egypt, the god Anpu (Anubis in Greek) receives the dead body of Osiris and places it in a tomb, and along with Isis and Nephthys, resurrects Osiris performing the rites of a sacred esoteric funeral which would later be adopted in Egypt as the customary way to carry out actual funerals for people who had physically died. Anubis provided unguents and rare herbs to help Isis and Nephthys with the embalming of Osiris. As Anubis received the mummy of Osiris into the tomb, he performed the
Opening of the Mouth and Eyes ceremony. This was done to restore the senses of the deceased so that they could function with all faculties in the afterlife. Esoterically however, this represents a restoration of the spiritual faculties of the initiate after they have gone through an inner death, which is a terribly demanding psychological struggle from which they need healing and repairing before resurrecting.
The Mayans also practiced this ritual on the dead, which they believed would send the deceased directly to become an immortal star. Like in Egypt, this was an symbolisritual signifying an inner process that became interpreted as something physical. Resurrection was also central to the Mayan s beliefs, symbolized by the death and rebirth of the Maize God Hun Hunahpu in their sacred text the Popol Vuh.
However, both the Egyptians and Mayans degenerated into gory rituals that involved human and animal sacrifice something totally abhorrent to real spirituality.
Anubis weighing the heart of a man against a feather on the scales of divine law.
The ancient Egyptians showed that the god Anubis presides over the processes of death, both physical and internal. As head judge of karma, he receives the dead and judges them according to their deeds in life, whether good or bad. He does this along with the forty-two judges of karma, and the god Thoth, who keeps records. This was depicted in ancient Egypt as the scene of the weighing of the heart, where at death a person has their heart weighed by Anubis on the scales of divine cosmic law.
The god Hermanubis, who was a merger of the Greek god Hermes with the Egyptian god Anubis. Resting on his left shoulder is the caduceus of Mercury, which is an alchemical symbol of two serpents entwined around a winged staff (photo copyright wiki user gnuckx, 2008).
In Greece Anubis became the god Hermes, and even merged to form the god Hermanubis, while in Rome he became the god Mercury. Both Hermes and Mercury were considered guides of the dead, and were depicted with winged sandals. Mercury was depicted holding a caduceus, symbol of alchemy with two serpents entwined around a winged staff, and Hermes with a winged cap. When the initiate lies symbolically dead in the sarcophagus, Anubis enters the door of the tomb wearing a headdress with the wings of Mercury.
However, few experience firsthand Anubis role in presiding over inner death as few ever meet the requirements. It is Anubis who has the role in the spiritual dimensions to administer the initiate upon the stage of inner death preceding resurrection.
After Seth betrays, traps, and kills Osiris, and cuts his body into fourteen symbolic pieces, Isis and Anpu/Anubis put the parts of Osiris back together. Osiris body is wrapped in linen swathing woven by the goddesses Isis and Nephthys, which will resist the influences of time and decay. This is symbolic of
the creation of the alchemical spiritual bodies, the bodies of gold, formed by the Mother goddess from the purified sexual energies.
Joseph of Arimathea wraps the body of the crucified Jesus in linen before he places it in a tomb, like Anubis who conceals the body of the initiate in the tomb in order to bring it back to life.
The secret ways of Ro-Setawe [the ancient site of Giza], The gate of the gods. Only one whose voice is heard May pass them . . . The secret way to which (only) Anubis has access In order to conceal the body of Osiris.
~ The Book of the One in the Netherworld
As lord of karma, and head of the judges of divine cosmic law, Anubis stands as gatekeeper between the realm of earthly mortality, and spiritual imperishability, letting only those who meet the requirements pass.
Anubis, the counter of hearts, deducts Osiris N. from the gods who belong to the earth, (and assigns him) to the gods who are in heaven.
~ The Pyramid Texts utterance 577
The initiate must pass through Anubis, the guardian between the realm of earthly and spiritual existence, and the judge of karma, to attain immortal life.
Evidence has come to light that the sphinx may have been originally carved as Anubis in his recumbent pariah dog/jackal form and set down in a sacred lake, and was later reshaped by natural and man-made forces over many thousands of years (the Great Sphinx and Pyramids were built possibly around 10,500 BC or earlier). On the spring equinox, Anubis statue would have gazed directly at the rising sun on the spring equinox, preceded by the constellation in his same shape (which we today know as Leo). This would have symbolized the resurrection of Osiris with the help of Anubis, precisely at the time of the spring equinox, along with the symbol of the crucified Christ between the good and bad thief in
the colors of the pyramids, as the most ancient enactment known of the attainment of eternal life.
An artist's impression of what the Great Pyramids and Sphinx of Giza may have looked like when they were originally built. Note that the water surrounding the sphinx actually formed a sacred lake that would have submerged half of its body.
Death
The Hindu goddess Kali, symbol of the great Mother who destroys our egos.
Anubis, like Joseph of Arimathea, places the initiate into the tomb, which signifies a time of inner death.
Death in the spiritual work is an inner death it is the death of the egos in the subconscious, the darkness of non-being, the myself, etc. within the human being, symbolized in the battles of the Hindu god Indra against Vritra. This death does not arrive inevitably as physical death does, but must be fought for, so that the spirit is freed, and totally dominates within, just as Indra frees the spiritual treasures contained within Vritra.
Osiris was placed in a tomb, just as Jesus is placed in a tomb. In the chambers of the Great Pyramids stone sarcophaguses were found (which are stone coffins) empty of burials this is because they were never built for the bodies of the dead, but for the initiates of inner death. In order to resurrect, one has to reach a level of inner death in order to meet the required spiritual purity for attaining eternal life. This is the death of the various egos, such as anger, fear, pride, etc.
However, for these egos to be destroyed, they must be seen and understood. For this, they have to
emerge from out of the subconscious and the only way for them to be drawn out is for the "milky ocean to be churned" for the circumstances of the initiate to be thrown into chaos and extreme difficulties. Thus an initiate is put through a form of the passion and crucifixion in their own lives, and is plunged into the hell of the subconscious of their own psyche in order to resurrect they must fight to ascend out. The only way out is for the egos to die, and to fulfill the cosmic laws of the great Mother of creation.
However, even the Christ must die in that he must be absorbed into the Mother, symbolized by the death of Jesus, Quetzalcoatl, Osiris, etc. It is the eternal Mother in her warrior aspect (symbolized by the goddesses Durga, Kali, Coatlicue, Sekhmet, etc.) that has the role of destroying the egos of the initiate. It is in her that the forces of life and death are found she gave birth to the Son, and at death the Son returns to her.
The Return to the Womb
In Egypt, creation is depicted as emerging as the god Atum as an island of fire from out of the primordial waters, and in Druidic myth, creation emerges from the cauldron of sap of the goddess Cariadwen/Cerridwen. Similarly, creation emerges from the primordial waters in the ancient Vedas of the Hindus, in the story of Genesis in the Bible, and in the legends of the Inca. These primordial waters are those of the eternal feminine womb, the cosmic Mother, which gives birth to the sun, the fire, the Christ/Son, and the light of the first day in the universe from which all of creation unfolds. It is through this same process in reverse that the initiate with the Son within returns to the source of creation.
The Aztec Christ Quetzalcoatl being swallowed by the serpent (photo copyright wiki user Ptcamn).
To attain eternal life, the Son must be reabsorbed by the Mother she who was not born of any, but who came into being through the division of the original divine androgyny into male and female.
Worship of the Egyptian goddess Neith can be traced to as far back as seven thousand years ago. The famous British Egyptologist Wallis Budge noted that on an inscription on a statue of Utchat-Heru, a high priest of Neith, relates that she was the first to give birth to anything, and that she had done so when nothing else had been born, and that she had herself never been born. The Greek historian Plutarch refers to an inscription on her statue in Sais that says, I am everything that has been, and that is, and that shall be, and no one has ever lifted my garment, and also The present and the future and the past, I am. My undergarment no one has uncovered. The fruit I brought forth, the sun came into being. This is perhaps the oldest and clearest reference to the great mother goddess who is not born but is a division of the original androgyny, who gave birth to the Christ, and the universe, and who remains ever-virgin.
The Son came from the womb of the great Mother, and so to return to the source, the Son must return
to his Mother s womb. But a return to the womb is also a time of death, as it is a return to the place which precedes birth. In Mayan and Aztec sacred teachings, this is symbolized by Quetzalcoatl being swallowed by the serpent, as the serpent is symbolic of the divine feminine (also known as kundalini). Everything that is born must eventually die, and so even the Son must die symbolized by the deaths of Jesus, Osiris, Krishna, etc.
This return to the womb is symbolized by Jesus placement in a cave-like tomb, which no one had been placed in before signifying the return to the womb of the ever-virginal divine Mother from whom the Son was born. In the Gospel of James, Jesus was also said to be born into a cave, which is a symbol of the womb, and his placement back inside a cave at his death completes the return to the womb. These few symbolic clues are part of the little of what remains of the universal Mother in the canonical Gospels.
A huge part of Jesus teachings about the spiritual Mother was censored out of history by the Orthodoxy, and this has become increasingly apparent as many other early Christian writings have come to light over
the last century, explained further in the article Reestablishing the Feminine in Godhead: The Role of the
Mother Goddess in Divinity.
In the story of Osiris, he is betrayed by Seth (just as Jesus was by Judas). Seth seals Osiris in a coffin, and then throws the coffin into the Nile River, symbolic of the Milky Way, which flows out to the sea
this is again symbolic of the return of the initiate to the womb of the divine Mother, the primordial waters of creation.
The Egyptian goddess Nut who was symbolized by the Milky Way and who swallowed and gave birth to the sun in a continuous cycle of death and rebirth.
Hathor is perhaps the most prominent mother goddess of ancient Egypt, who was depicted as a cow, sometimes with a face shaped like a uterus to reflect her role of sacred birth. Both she and the goddess Nut were associated with the Milky Way, along with many other mother goddesses around the world it is now known that at the center of the Milky Way is a birthplace of stars. Nut is depicted as stretching across the sky with a body of stars, giving birth to and then swallowing the sun in an eternal cycle of birth, death, and rebirth. Death for ancient Egyptians was a return to the womb by being swallowed by the goddess (just as the serpent swallows Quetzalcoatl).
Similarly, to the esoteric Neolithic peoples of Ireland, who built sacred sites like Newgrange around 3500 BC, the Milky Way was known as "Bealach na Bó Finne," which means the way of the white cow, and which they also associated with a river around which they built their sacred sites just as the ancient Egyptians did. In both their culture and that of the ancient Egyptians (as well as in ancient Hindu culture), the cow was a sacred symbol of the great Mother, the eternal feminine.
In Neolithic Ireland, as in Egypt, they also aligned their temples to the spring equinox using symbols
of resurrection. Within the eastern passage laid out in a cruciform shape of the temple mound of Knowth, there lies the Dagda Cauldron, symbol of the womb. In Irish myth the cauldron was believed to be a vessel of plenty and it is said that no one ever left it hungry, and it never ran out. It is also said to have had the power to regenerate life so that dead bodies could be placed into the cauldron and drawn out alive and whole again. This is symbolic of resurrection. The symbol of the cross in the east chamber connects this part of the mound with the spring equinox, the time of Easter, thousands of years before it was symbolized again by Jesus.
A ceremonial Celtic cauldron found in Gunderstrup, Denmark (photo copyright wiki user Rosemania, 2009).
The return to the womb is also found in the story of Jonah being swallowed by the whale/fish, where he spends three days and nights, just as Jesus did within the tomb. The Maize God Hun Hunahpu resurrects from a turtle, known as the tomb of the earth, which is another symbol of the womb.
The mound, cauldron, tomb, fish, turtle, and waters are all symbols of the womb, which the initiate enters after their death at crucifixion. This is the return of the Son to the Mother, and it is in the Mother in
which both the forces of death and birth are found.
The womb is the receptacle in which sexual activity takes place, and can therefore symbolize sexual activity itself, and activity in the alchemical mixing process. Therefore, the Son s return to the womb also represents the initiate s return to the work of alchemy, to work with the Mother in the processes of inner death and birth which is the death of the ego, and the creation of the imperishability of the spirit (that which is everlasting). In returning to the womb, the initiate with the Son within works alchemically to transform themselves in order to resurrect. The initiate has already attained permanent Samadhi when they merged with the Son from there they must die to their ego states with the help of the Mother to attain the Tality within at resurrection.
Destroy this temple, and I will raise it again in three days.
~ Jesus in John 2:19, The Bible
Sexual Symbols
A tall stone and round stone at the Neolithic temple mound Knowth, symbolic of the male and female sexual organs.
In the churning of the milky ocean, the ocean represents the Milky Way, but also the sexual waters/energies, which the initiate must control so that the spiritual faculties and the elixir of immortality emerge. They must struggle between the pull of sexual desire as the demons on one side, and that of the spirit, symbolized as the devas, on the other. The demons and devas pull back and forth on a giant serpent, which is also a symbol of the sexual energies as the kundalini. Jesus, crucified on a cross, which is a sexual symbol, is stretched with his arms across it to a point that is excruciating, signifying the painful struggle between desire and the spirit.
When Krishna is killed, he is ritually bathing himself in the water of the river Ganges, which is symbolic of the purification of the sexual energies. Seth cuts Osiris body into fourteen pieces, thirteen of which the goddess Isis finds. Thirteen is the symbolic number of death, which represents the inner death of the initiate. The fourteenth piece of Osiris, which is swallowed by a fish, is his phallus, so Isis fashions a phallus of gold. Fourteen is the number of alchemical transmutation, and the gold phallus represents the transformation of the sexual energies into the gold of the spirit.
The Lance of Longinus, which pierced the side of Jesus while he was on the cross, and the Holy Grail used at the last supper and which caught the blood of Jesus from the wound made by the lance, are both sexual symbols. The lance is the male phallus, and the grail the feminine uterus. The wine and blood of Christ are the purified sexual energies. These symbols are also found at the Neolithic temple mound Knowth, which incorporated the symbol of the cross at the time of the spring equinox thousands of years before Jesus. Outside the mound is a tall stone beside a short rounded one, representing the male and female sexual organs.
The Holy Grail became the subject of the esoteric teaching encoded in Arthurian legends, in which the knights of Arthur s round table quested for this sacred relic. In the story, Lancelot is unable to enter the chapel of the grail because he was an adulterer, revealing the sexual purity needed in the spiritual work. It is only Galahad who had the purity required, and upon beholding the grail was made complete and taken up to heaven.
The Elixir of Immortality and the Bodies of Gold
Sir Galahad receiving the Holy Grail.
The Holy Grail, like the symbol of the cauldron of the Neolithic builders of Ireland, is a symbol of the female sexual organs. It is within sex that the wine of the alchemist is transformed from its impure leaden state, to the gold of the spirit.
This transformed sexual energy has been called Amrita and Soma in ancient Hindu texts, and Ambrosia in the Eleusinian mysteries of ancient Greece. It is the drink of the gods, the elixir of immortality. In the ancient Hindu story of the churning of the milky ocean, this Amrita is produced by the struggle between the demons and devas which are symbolic of the struggles between the forces of
sexual desire on one hand (the bad thief) and the bliss of the spirit (the good thief) on the other. It is in this struggle that the sexual energies are purified.
The demons in the story try to steal the elixir of immortality, symbolizing the bad thief of sexual desire that tries to steal the sexual energies for pleasure. However, through the help of the god Vishnu, the devas instead gain possession of the elixir. The devas are symbolic of the good thief who takes the sexual energies and uses them to create the bliss and imperishable bodies of the spirit. The god Indra who is also present, drinks this elixir, and in doing so, is able to ascend to heaven, just as Galahad did in the presence of the Holy Grail.
The god Indra is symbolic of the initiate with the Son within he continuously fights Vritra, represented as a dragon that contains the life sustaining treasures of the universe (the waters, light, and cows) which Indra must conquer back, as well as fighting the asuras (demons). This is the fight to rescue consciousness from the darkness of the subconscious (chaos and non-being), which is done in alchemy.
Indra symbolically drinks Soma, the purified sexual energies, to give himself the strength he needs in battle and finally defeats the asuras (the demons of the churning of the milky ocean). This Soma gives him the body of gold he is depicted with.
In Indra are set fast all forms of golden hue.
~ The Atharva Veda
In ancient Egypt, the gods are also said to possess the body of gold, which is an imperishable body of the spirit.
The body of the dead is of gold like that of a god and so it consists of imperishable material. Rise on your bones of bronze and on your limbs of gold, for this body of yours belongs to a god. It does not perish. It does not decompose, it does not consume.
~ The Pyramid Texts
Krishna with a golden halo and standing by a white cow, symbol of the eternal Mother who works with the initiate to create the golden bodies.
This body of gold is also symbolized by the halo, which Jesus and Krishna are both depicted with.
The bodies of gold are the bodies of the Son, formed within by the purification of the sexual energies.
These are the imperishable bodies which continue as the vessels of the initiate in the spiritual realm, while the physical body dies and decays. Those without these golden bodies do not have the vehicles to enter the spiritual realms, and instead go to the realm of the dead.
Heaven is not the wide blue sky but the place where corporeality is begotten in the house of the Creative. If one keeps this up for a long time there develops quite naturally, in addition to the body, yet another spirit-body.
~ The Secret of the Golden Flower (ancient Taoist text)
We have drunk Soma and become immortal; we have attained the light, the Gods discovered. Now what may foeman's malice do to harm us? What, O Immortal, mortal man's deception?
~ The Rigveda 8.48.3
The Descent into Hell
Jesus enters hell.
The return to the womb is also to enter into the primordial chaos, into darkness, and the Abyss. During the symbolic three days in the tomb, Jesus descends into hell. This is the descent of the initiate into hellish psychological regions in which they have to face sufferings such as those found in hell itself, and work with the Mother in the inner death of the egos.
For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of a huge fish, so the Son of Man will be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
~ Jesus in Matthew 12:40. The Bible
The east-west axis of the temple of Angkor Wat is offset to give a three day anticipation of the spring
equinox. This is the symbolic three day time preceding the resurrection in which the nights still have dominion over the days.
Numerous sacred teachings throughout the world speak of an underworld. It is the place people go to who have not attained immortality to undergo the process of the death and decay of their own psychological defects, the egos. Either the Mother works with the initiate in the underworld to destroy the egos in the spiritual work during life, or the Mother destroys them in the underworld as the person suffers the consequences of their egos after death. To the ancient Egyptians it was the place of the evil dead called the Place of Annihilation. To the Mayans it was Xibalba, meaning Place of Fright. The Hindus and Buddhists call it Naraka. In Christianity it is Hell, and in Greek mythology it is Hades, etc.
The passion and crucifixion, as if not bad enough, is not all the initiate is subjected to. After death they must descend into the hellish regions of their own psyche, and then painstakingly pull themselves back out in order to resurrect. This descent is into the darkness of their own subconscious, as the light of consciousness is trapped within the subconscious of the initiate and can only be freed through the defeat of darkness.
This is illustrated in the Assyrian story of the death of the solar god Tammuz. After his death, it is the Mother goddess Ishtar who went on a quest to recover the sacred elixir that could restore him back to life.
To do so, she had to descend into hell. The guardians of hell stated that she must descend as all lost souls do, which is to give up something at each gate of every descending layer of hell. She firstly gives up her crown, then her earrings, her necklace, etc. until finally she is totally stripped naked before the Queen of Hell who then imprisons her and subjects her to all manner of disease. This symbolizes the descent of the initiate who is increasingly stripped of their faculties, inner strength, and things of the physical world, and upon losing each, goes through the particular psychological torment of that region of hell in their own psyche. The work in hell is with the Mother goddess, as the chaos is her womb, and she is the one who has the power to destroy the egos and grant eternal life to the initiate.
While Ishtar is in hell, the world falls into chaos, as it is she that gives life to the natural world; likewise, while the initiate is tormented and suffers in the womb of the Mother, the sacred spiritual work falls into chaos in the world. Upon seeing this, the gods intervene and pour the waters of life over Ishtar
who is healed and then begins her ascent back out of hell regaining each of her formerly lost powers one by one.
At the temple of Chichen Itza in Mexico, the feathered serpent Quetzalcoatl, the Son, ascends the nine terraces of the pyramid in a display of light created by the movement of the spring equinox sun. The Mayans knew that the underworld had nine layers, just as Dante described in his esoteric work The Divine Comedy. This symbolizes the ascent of the Mother-Son, Quetzalcoatl swallowed by the serpent, from out of the underworld to resurrect.
Similarly, the temple of the grand jaguar in Tikal has nine terraces to its pyramid, which the rising spring equinox sun ascends to crown the pinnacle. As a symbol, the jaguar was considered the night sun
the form the sun takes in its journey through the underworld. This site symbolizes the ascent of the Son from out of the underworld to resurrect.
The number nine is also symbolic of the ninth sphere, which is the work of sexual alchemy. It is also through the work in alchemy, the work of inner death and birth, that one ascends. The ascent out of the underworld in order to resurrect is a long and difficult climb.
In the mystery schools of Odin in Scandinavia, an initiate had to pass through nine chambers in which they were subjected to various trials before being called "resurrected." This is symbolic of the trials an initiate goes through psychologically in the nine layers of hell in order to resurrect.
Resurrection
Anubis resurrecting the initiate in the presence of the goddess Isis. Goddesses pour the waters of life onto the body to restore it (photo copyright wiki user ShillukinUSA, 2013).
Resurrection is the attainment of eternal life, immortality, and imperishability mentioned in ancient esoteric texts and celebrated at the time of the spring equinox.
An ancient Taoist text wisely states that those who wish to reach eternal life must look for the place where creation originated:
Whoever seeks eternal life must search for the place whence human nature and life originally sprang.
~ The Secret of the Golden Flower
Life and creation originally sprang from the womb of the great Mother of the universe as described in creation stories throughout the ancient world. That which is eternal is that which never dies and only that which is never born does not die. In creation myths a divine androgynous being emerges from the great unmanifest and unknowable source. This being divides into male and female in order to create and gives birth to a son, and the rest of creation. The Mother goddess is one half of the eternal first being, and therefore is not born of any. When the Son returns to and becomes one with the Mother, the Son becomes immortal, thus resurrecting and attaining eternal life.
I have been united to Him, for the Lover has found the Beloved, And because I shall love Him that is the Son, I shall become a son; For he that is joined to Him that is immortal, will also himself become immortal; And he who has pleasure in the Living One, will become living.
~ The Odes of Solomon
In the story of Osiris, it is Isis who goes on a quest to bring all the different parts of his dismembered body back together, and bring him back to life. Likewise Ishtar goes on a terrible quest to bring Tammuz back to life by fetching the waters of life. It is the Mother goddess who has power over life and death. If the initiate is able to pass through the death of the egos and fulfill her laws, then the Son is absorbed into the Mother and the initiate becomes a serpent of light.
I tell you truly, the Book of Nature is a Holy Scroll, and if you would have the Sons of Men save themselves and find everlasting life, teach them how once again to read from the living pages of the Earthly Mother. For in everything that is life is the law written. It is written in the grass, in the trees, in rivers, mountains, birds of the sky and fishes of the sea; and most of all within the Son of Man. Only when he returns to the bosom of his Earthly Mother will he find everlasting life and the Stream of Life which leads to his Heavenly Father; only then may the dark vision of the future
come not to pass.
~ The Essene Gospel of Peace, Book 4
To achieve full self-realization an initiate must return to the source of creation, the Absolute, where all is one. To do that the different parts of the Being that were divided in creation must unite to form one whole, as it is not possible to enter the Absolute divided. Now the Son has become one with the Mother, the Mother must now return to the Father, so that the consciousness of the individual is completely whole again as one.
For truly, no one can reach the Heavenly Father unless through the Earthly Mother.
~ The Essene Gospel of Peace
While the evil of the world celebrated the death of the Son, as Jesus, Osiris, Krishna, etc., it is the Son who truly triumphs in the defeat of darkness within the initiate and in his resurrection, symbolized by the rising of the spring equinox sun. Although the passion and death of the Son is a tale of human tragedy, the darkness of death and winter has its role in the cycles of life in the universe and in the process of self-realization and that darkness is overcome by light at the spring equinox and by the resurrection of the individual.
The work from here is to now return to the great Father, known as the ascension and symbolized at the summer solstice.
The resurrected Osiris under the protection of the great Mother goddess Isis (photo copyright Olaf Tausch 2009).
To say: It is beautiful to see, it is peaceful to hear that Osiris stands at the door of the gods.
Thy sanctuary, N. [the initiate], is to thee as a heart of secret places; it opens for thee the double doors of heaven, it opens for thee the double doors of the way; it makes for thee a way, that thou mayest enter there among the gods, that thou mayest live as thy soul.
O N., thou art not like the dead, who art dead,
thou art living, thou art alive, together with them, the spirits, the imperishable stars.
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 667
Oh Osiris the King, you have gone, but you will return. You have slept, but you will awake. You have died, but you will live. The tomb is open for you. The doors of the coffin are drawn back for you. The doors of the sky are thrown open for you.
~ The Pyramid Texts
CHAPTER EIGHT
Ancient Sacred Sites Aligned to the Spring Equinox
This chapter brings together ancient sacred sites from around the world which align to the spring equinox.
Even though they are separated by vast distances and time, they share a knowledge of the symbolic spiritual significance of the spring equinox as a time of resurrection and attainment of eternal life. They were built by people in ancient times who had a knowledge of the spiritual process that leads to enlightenment, and who created places to carry out initiations and rites, as well as bring the cosmic eternal forces that are found in this process to earth and into the individual.
The following sacred sites from around the world reveal an incredible knowledge of the spiritual significance of the spring equinox and its relationship to the internal spirituality of humankind.
The Sphinx and Great Pyramid of Giza ~ Egypt
The Sphinx, which gazes precisely at sunrise on the equinox (photo copyright wiki user Hajor, 2002).
One of the most dominant alignments (as there are many both solar and stellar) of the Giza plateau, home to the Sphinx and the Great Pyramids, is the spring equinox.
The Sphinx gazes due east to where the sun rises on the morning of the spring equinox. It is estimated that during the era of 10,970 to 8810 BC (although earlier dates have also been given) it also gazed directly toward the rising of its own celestial image (known today as the constellation of Leo in the form of a recumbent lion), which would have preceded the sun at dawn on the spring equinox. Due to what is called the precession of the equinoxes the sun rises in a different constellation on the spring equinox approximately every 2,150 years. At that time, the spring equinox sun rose in the constellation of Leo.
This reveals, along with archaeological evidence of weathering and esoteric evidence of what the Sphinx was originally intended to symbolize, that the Sphinx is much older than mainstream Egyptologists say
who date it to around 2500 BC.
Furthermore, the causeway connecting the sphinx to the second of the three Great Pyramids is slightly offset. Again, mainstream Egyptologists argue that this was a design flaw to accommodate the Sphinx into the layout of the Giza pyramids. But it was actually done for a specific esoteric reason as everything was in the original design of the ancient Giza plateau.
Standing on the causeway facing the rising sun on the spring equinox during this era, one could have witnessed the constellation of Leo rising over the horizon just before dawn with its head appearing first before being followed by its recumbent body. Looking across at the Sphinx from the same point on the
causeway, this same image is mirrored by the Sphinx itself with only its head visible above the plateau and its recumbent body set down inside a carved out enclosure.
The design of the Sphinx interwoven into the spring equinox and the constellations has an important esoteric meaning. It pinpoints the celestial parts while integrating them into an earthly design, which symbolically re-enact the process of the resurrection of Osiris as found in the ancient Pyramid Texts the oldest surviving sacred texts of Egypt.
Close by, the Great Pyramid is designed in such a way that at noon on the spring equinox it casts no shadow.
The sphinx and great pyramid are giant symbols, and both are part of a plan on the ground that forms a greater symbol.
The pyramids were never built as tombs for pharaohs and evidence has come to light that Sphinx was not originally built as a man-headed lion, and possibly not even a lion at all, but as the deity Anubis in his form as recumbent pariah dog/jackal who resurrected Osiris. Going back into the most ancient accounts, the Sphinx was a spiritual symbol of incredible significance, which was successively restored, re-carved, and vandalized over thousands of years. It symbolizes the resurrection of Osiris at the dawning of the sun on the spring equinox. This is explored further in the next chapter Decoding the Ancient Meaning of the Sphinx and Its Origin as Anubis .
Angkor Wat ~ Cambodia
Angkor Wat (photo copyright Bjorn Christian Torrissen, 2005).
Angkor is a massive complex of ancient stone temples in the jungle of Cambodia. The temple of Angkor Wat is its most famous and aligns to the rising sun of the spring equinox. The temple is said to be a representation of Mount Meru, the ancient Hindu home of the gods. The five central towers symbolize the five peaks of the mountain, and the walls and moat the surrounding mountain ranges and ocean.
The axis of the temple is offset to give a three day anticipation of the coming spring equinox alignment. On the morning of the spring equinox, the sun rises up the side of the central tower (mountain peak) of the temple and crowns its pinnacle.
Angkor Wat is decorated with a massive stone mural that depicts the ancient Hindu story of the churning of the milky ocean (along with scenes from the sacred texts the Mahabharata and Ramayana) in which the asuras (demons) and devas (angels) are in a giant tug of war using a serpent wrapped around a mountain, which churns the great milky ocean as they pull back and forth. This churning produces Amrita, the nectar of immortality, eventually consumed by the devas and which allows Indra to return to his abode as the King of Heaven. The churning of the milky ocean reveals a fundamental spiritual principle found in the universe the role of darkness and light in creation, within ourselves, and in the process of enlightenment. The struggle against darkness and its defeat, which is found in all resurrection accounts, is what leads to eternal life.
The central segment of the mural of the churning of the milky ocean at Angkor Wat. Vishnu is the large central figure above him is Indra, below him the turtle in the ocean, and on either side the demons and devas pulling (photo copyright wiki user Markalexander100, 2005).
This giant relief is found carved into an eastern wall, and is associated with the spring equinox, while other reliefs are associated with the other four points of the year. Researcher Graham Hancock discovered that Angkor Wat and a number of surrounding temples (around fifteen) mirror the constellation of Draco as it would have appeared in the sky at the time of the spring equinox in the year 10,500 BC, many thousands of years before it is said to have been built. With the combination of the constellation of Draco, which is shaped like a giant serpent, and the tower of the temple said to represent Mount Meru, all aligned at the spring equinox, Angkor Wat brings together the counterparts of the churning of the milky ocean in combination with the earth and the sky.
In the mural depicting this scene, there are ninety-one demons on the left, representing the number of days between the winter solstice and the spring equinox, and on the right are eighty-eight devas, representing the number of days from the spring equinox to the summer solstice, minus three. Each side
measures 54 cubits together which adds to 108, a number sacred in Buddhism and Hinduism, said by some to be the number of human incarnations one has to awaken in a cycle of the Wheel of Samsara.
The numbers 108, 54, along with 72 and 36 (which when taken as individual digits all add to 9), have been incorporated into the design of Angkor Wat and surrounding temples. These numbers are part of the sacred mathematics of the phenomena known as the precession of the equinoxes, a cosmic cycle of the earth related to the spring equinox, which the churning of the milky ocean is also said to symbolize.
The temple of Phnom Bakheng is surrounded by 108 towers 108 is the sum of 72 and 36 (and 72 is 36 twice). The number of temples built around Angkor is 72. Our earth moves one degree in its processional cycle throughout the constellations every 72 years. Incredibly, Angkor Wat is situated longitude 72° east of the Pyramids of Giza (which also features stellar alignments around 10,500 BC).
Even the causeway of Angkor Wat incorporates cosmic symbolism and numbers encoding the cycles of time. The axial lengths along the causeway of Angkor Wat were designed to represent the great world ages of Hindu cosmology called Yugas.
Additionally, the temples of Bakong, Prah Ko, and Prei Monli at Roluos, south of the main Angkor complex, mirror the three stars in the Corona Borealis as they appeared at dawn on the spring equinox in 10,500 BC. Interestingly, Corona Borealis would not have been visible from these temples during the tenth and eleventh centuries when they were said to have been constructed.
Tikal ~ Guatemala
Temple of the Grand Jaguar at Tikal (photo copyright Raymond Ostertag, 2006).
Tikal is an ancient series of temples located deep in the jungle of Guatemala. Like many ancient sites in South America, the temples here were successively built over, which means that their origins are actually much older. Here, tall pyramid style temples rise out of the canopy of the rainforest.
On the spring equinox, the sun rises up the middle of The Temple of the Grand Jaguar with its nine terraces to crown its pinnacle. In doing so, it causes the temple to cast a perfect shadow over the much smaller Temple of the Moon, which has three terraces and was decorated with a wooden lintel showing the image of a royal woman (the original stone mantle of the temple is too dilapidated to make out whether there was anything originally carved into it).
The Temple of the Grand Jaguar was decorated with a wooden lintel depicting a jaguar with water lilies sprouting from its head, protecting the King (again the original stone mantle is worn away).
The jaguar is an ancient Mayan and Olmec symbol dating back to the earliest recorded cultures in
South America, with depictions that date from around 1,500 BC. The water-lily jaguar was considered a transformer, and could also be depicted amidst flames. The meaning of the water-lily jaguar remains obscure in Mayan culture, however the jaguar itself has parallels in many esoteric teachings as the tiger the Hindu warrior goddess Durga rides upon, and the lion-headed warrior goddess of Egypt Sekhmet, and of Buddhist lion-headed goddess Senge Dongma each also associated with fire.
The jaguar of South America (like the lion and tiger) is the equivalent symbol of the fierce war against darkness and evil within the initiate. Known as the god of terrestrial fire in South America, it is symbolically related to the inner alchemical fire which transforms someone spiritually.
The jaguar was considered the night sun the form the sun takes in its journey through the underworld.
At the time of the spring equinox the sun rises from out of the underworld to defeat the darkness. The rising of the sun was very much associated with resurrection to the Mayans, and again resurrection is symbolized at this site at the spring equinox as in many other ancient esoteric sites around the world. A plate illustrating the resurrection of the Mayan maize god of resurrection was also found at Tikal.
The complex at Tikal includes many other solar and stellar alignments, including to the solstices and to the constellation of the Pleiades.
Like other South American sites, Tikal descended into human sacrifice and bloodletting. Graffiti inside the temples depicts scenes of sacrificial victims. Again, this was a horrific distortion of the original spiritual teaching as it has happened so many times in the past, and why spiritual knowledge is continually given anew.
Cairn T ~ Ireland
Cairn T at the site of Loughcrew (photo copyright William Whyte, 2008).
Thousands of years ago, Ireland was inhabited by the Tuatha Dé Danann a mysterious god-like people most closely connected with the ancient megalithic sites of Ireland. They were said to be preceded by the Fir Bolg, another mythical ancient peoples. While the ancient history of Ireland turned into legends and myth passed on verbally through thousands of years, what is known as set in stone is that Ireland was once inhabited by a highly astronomically advanced people who had knowledge of esoteric principles, which they incorporated into the design of their megalithic temples.
Cairn T is the name given to an ancient Neolithic mound with an inner chamber that aligns to the equinoxes, and is believed to have been built around 3,500 BC (and was even possibly built on an older sacred site). It is the main and central mound in a group of Neolithic sites at a place called Loughcrew, which originally had around forty monuments. It is thirty-five meters in diameter and was once covered in a thick mantle of quartz. The rising sun on the spring equinox enters the mound and travels into its inner chamber which is in the shape of a cross/cruciform, to alight the back stone, called the Sliabh na Caillí or Equinox Stone, which is covered in astronomical symbols.
You can explore Loughcrew and its beautiful art through videos and photo at these websites:
http://www.knowth.com/loughcrew.htm
http://www.carrowkeel.com/index.html
The equinox sunrise viewed from Cairn T rises over the Hill of Slane, which is a sacred hill that is
framed by the view looking back out from the chamber of Cairn T. The Hill of Slane formed part of a larger equinox alignment in ancient Ireland as described in the Millmount-Croagh Patrick alignment further below.
Knowth ~ Ireland
Nearby Cairn T at Loughrew is another ancient Neolithic site called Knowth, also thought to have been built around 3,500 BC. It is the largest ancient monument in Ireland and contains the largest collection of megalithic artwork in all of Europe. Some believe it could have served as an ancient repository of wisdom that was carved symbolically into its stone (much like the temples of Egypt).
It is a giant man-made mound one acre in size with two inner chambers one aligned to the east, and the other the west. These chambers are eighteen days off aligning to the spring and autumn equinoxes, so that the sunrise enters the east chamber and is funneled along its passage near the spring equinox, while the west chamber captures the sunset near the autumn equinox. The reason for this is still unknown, and
further investigation is currently trying to determine whether these passages used lunar alignments to foretell the equinoxes instead. What seems clear is that this mound is connected to the equinox in its alignments in some way.
The east chamber (the direction of east typically associated with the spring equinox) is in a cruciform shape it is the biggest in Ireland and houses the Dagda Cauldron. The Dagda Cauldron is a large stone basin with a symbolic design carved into it, thought to be placed inside Knowth before the temple mound was built, as it is too large to have been brought into it later. It is shaped like a cauldron an important motif in Irish mythology. The most well-known cauldron in Irish myth belonged to Dagda, a chieftain of the Tuatha Dé Danann. His cauldron was one of the four chief treasures that the Dé Dananns are said to have brought to Ireland the others being the Stone of Destiny at Tara, the Sword of Light, and Spear of Lugh.
Cauldrons later became associated with witches, as the esoteric culture of Ireland degenerated and was taken over by black magic, with the Druids falling into dark practices such as animal sacrifice and worshiping demons. However, the cauldron was originally a spiritual symbol.
In Irish myth the cauldron was believed to be a vessel of plenty and it is said that no one ever left it hungry, and it never ran out. It is also said to have had the power to regenerate life so that dead bodies could be placed into the cauldron and drawn out alive and whole again. This is symbolic of resurrection, in which the initiate dies internally to live again eternally. The mound and cauldron are symbols of the womb, from which all life comes forth. It represents the receptacle in which sexual activity takes place, and can therefore symbolize sexual activity itself, and activity in the alchemical mixing process. The symbol of the cross in the east chamber connects this part of the mound with the spring equinox, the time of Easter, thousands of years before it was symbolized again by Jesus.
Another sexual symbol is present at Knowth, again revealing the knowledge of the forces of creation and life in spirituality there is a pair of large standing stones outside its west entrance. One is tall and thin, a phallic symbol representing the male force, and the other is squat and round, representing the female.
The Millmount-Croagh Patrick Alignment ~ Ireland
The ancient man-made mound at Millmount, once a sacred astronomical observatory now a fort with canon fire displays (photo copyright Kieran Campbell, 2008).
The Millmount-Croagh Patrick alignment to the spring equinox is not just to one particular site, but is created from the alignment of a number of sites in relation to each other, which were built from the East to the West Coast of Ireland stretching over 135 miles.
The ancient peoples were aware of how the natural land formations aligned at certain times of the year, and incorporated them into the design of their sacred sites again bringing the earthly and celestial together on the ground like was done in Egypt and Angkor. These alignments of sites which stretch for miles are found around Britain.
This alignment starts at a place called Millmount (near the East Coast of Ireland), which is an ancient temple mound that later became used as a fort and has been built over and left unexcavated. In Irish myth, it is identified as the burial place of Amergin mac Míled, an ancient Druid, warrior, and chief.
Standing at Millmount, one can watch the sunset around two days after the spring equinox (around March 23rd), set directly over the Hill of Slane, which stands 158 meters tall. The name of Slane was given to the hill after Sláine, the king of the Fir Bolg (a mythological race that used to inhabit Ireland), who is said to have been buried there. Slane was also supposed to have been the location of a mythical healing well, which was used by the Tuatha Dé Danann to heal their wounds during battle. Later, it is believed to be the place where Saint Patrick lit the Easter fire on March 23rd (coinciding with the setting sun on this date). There is an artificial mound on the western end of the hilltop, and there may be the remains of an ancient sacred site due to the presence of two Neolithic standing stones in the burial yard of the Christian abbey that stands there today. This is clearly an ancient site that acted as an astronomical marker which was taken on by the Christians as they did with so many other sites like Glastonbury Tor.
The near spring equinox sunset continues its alignment west, skirting the hills of Loughcrew (home of Cairn T which aligns to the equinox sunrises) on its way, and traveling directly through Rathcroghaun (or Cruachan Aí), one of the largest archaeological complexes in the world, with 200 monuments located in a ten-mile radius. These include Oweynagat (Cave of the Cats) the entrance to the Celtic Otherworld and home to the Goddess Morrigan, Daithi s Mound with its standing stone, and the main site called Rathcroghan mound a man-made mound ninety meters wide at its base on which once stood buildings.
Electric scans have now detected further enclosures beneath the ground which surround this mound. It is believed by many that queen Medb was the local earth goddess, and that becoming king meant marrying the earth, with the inauguration more than likely taking place on Rathcroghan mound itself.
The alignment ends on the West Coast of Ireland at Croagh Patrick, one of Ireland s sacred mountains, intersecting the Christian church built on its summit exactly. Again, this was an ancient sacred site that was taken over by the Christians. The mountain s top is shaped like a pyramid, which can be seen from miles around. The old name for the mountain is Croghan Aigle, which might be translated as the Eagle's Peak. The mountain is ringed by old sites, monuments, and standing stones revealing that it was a place held sacred from ancient times.
Cairnpapple and Arthur s Seat Alignment ~ Scotland
Ancient cairn, stone circle, wooden post holes, and man-made ditch atop of Cairnpapple (photo copyright James Allen, 2008).
This alignment to the spring equinox is another created by natural formations that became sacred sites and observation points of the spring equinox sunrise.
Cairnpapple is an ancient megalithic complex set on top of a hill in Scotland, which is said to have been used as a sacred site for around four thousand years, starting around 3500 BC and includes a standing stone circle. Here, evidence was found that this site had been used by the beaker people, who are believed to have built some of Stonehenge.
From the site of Cairnpapple, the spring equinox sun rises over Arthur s Seat, associated with King Arthur, and also Huly Hill, which is another site of an ancient cairn and standing stones.
CHAPTER NINE
Decoding the Ancient Meaning of the Sphinx and Its
Origin as Anubis
An artist's impression of what the Great Pyramids and Sphinx of Giza may have looked like when they were originally built. Note that the water surrounding the sphinx actually formed a sacred lake that would have submerged half of its body.
The meaning of the Great Sphinx and Pyramids at Giza, Egypt, has eluded the many attempts to understand it using science alone. The peoples who built the Giza site were obviously deeply interested in spirituality. The culture that followed in ancient Egypt, perhaps more than any other, used the intuitive language of symbolism to convey profound spiritual truths those who had enough inner wisdom could speak this language, while those who did not were rendered incapable of deciphering it. This is why the
site at Giza has remained a mystery to most, even though it is one of the most studied sites in the world.
To discover the meaning of the Giza site requires a knowledge of the meaning of the spiritual symbols used in its design. The spiritual knowledge which the builders of the Great Pyramids and Sphinx possessed is timeless, and thus it is possible to unlock this site's meaning through the understanding of this same universal knowledge today, which has found its expression in different forms and cultures in ancient history.
The enigmatic and mysterious Sphinx, great centerpiece to this site's design, holds much of the answer. In this chapter, we will go back as far as possible into the origins of the Sphinx to explore its meaning, using the understanding of the sacred knowledge of the ancient builders.
The Sphinx as Anubis
The Great Sphinx being excavated, starting in AD 1817. Its paws are already covered in restoration stones from Roman times and its head is obviously too small in relation to the size of the body, indicating it was re-carved at least once.
To understand the meaning of the Sphinx, we need to firstly uncover its original form, as the form it takes today is the result of multiple restorations dating from at least 1400 BC.
Anyone who studies photos of the Sphinx can see that it is out of proportion. Its head is much too small for its body, and is far less weathered than the rest of the body and surrounding enclosure. Its head has obviously been re-carved, perhaps numerous times, and its body has been covered with restoration stones dating from thousands of years ago right up until today, giving the Sphinx its leonine shape while masking its original form. So to find the clues as to what it originally was, we have to look further than the Sphinx alone.
A study of the archaeology, astronomy, and esoteric messages contained in the structures, objects, and art of the Giza Plateau and Sphinx, point to the Sphinx originally being sculpted as the ancient jackal/dog deity Anubis, facilitator of the process from death to resurrection, agent of cosmic law, and gatekeeper of the passage to immortality.
The Pyramids Texts, carved into the stone walls of the pyramids at Saqqara in Egypt, date from around 2400 BC and are currently the oldest dated sacred texts in the world. They contain the earliest references to the Great Sphinx and Pyramids of Egypt, and indicate that the Great Sphinx once took the form of the Egyptian god Anubis.
In ancient times the site of the Great Pyramids, where the Sphinx lies, was called Ro-Setawe, the Sacred Land and the Necropolis, and the Pyramid Texts refer to Anubis as "Lord of Ro-Setawe," "Anubis who presides over the Sacred Land" (and also Pure Land, and Secluded Land), and "he at the Head of the Necropolis," which are all ancient references to Anubis standing guard over the site of the Great Pyramids. This may not have been just a metaphysical reference, but a very physical one, as the Sphinx does indeed stand at the entrance to the site of the Great Pyramids.
This diagram shows the Sphinx from above. Directly in front of it is the Sphinx Temple, and to its right is the Valley Temple, which has two quays protruding from it (the ones with the blue spikes) which would have brought people into the Giza site by boat and formed the entrance to the entire Giza plateau. A causeway leads from the Valley Temple (offset at 14° due east) past the Sphinx. The waters of the river Nile would have also reached into the area around the Sphinx, creating a sacred lake. The area around the Sphinx was dug out to create the lake, and the giant blocks excavated used to build the Sphinx and Valley Temples.
In ancient times, the Giza site would have been entered by boat as the river Nile reached right up to the Sphinx. Boat quays were discovered protruding from the Valley Temple beside the Sphinx (which was built out of the stones excavated from around the Sphinx when it was first created). Anyone who entered the Giza site had to pass by the Sphinx by arriving via boat and passing by the great statue along a grand causeway leading to the Pyramids.
Modern researcher Robert Temple has uncovered the archaeological evidence for the Sphinx being Anubis in great detail, but not only does the archaeological evidence point to Anubis being the original
form of the Great Sphinx, it also ties in with the same kind of spiritual knowledge that is universally represented throughout cultures around the world and in the most ancient sacred texts of Egypt.
Although recognized by millions, the Sphinx has remained an enigma; but by knowing its original form and understanding the principles of esoteric knowledge, its symbolism may be understood and its message decoded. Aligned to precise cosmic events, lying atop of hidden chambers, surrounded by a sacred lake, and part of an incredible master plan that incorporates the Great Pyramids using advanced geometry, the Sphinx is a monument of magnificent wisdom and scale that symbolizes the attainment of imperishability through resurrection.
The Great Sphinx aligns to the spring equinox, a time of spiritual resurrection as found in the design of many other ancient sites throughout the world also aligned to this solar event. One of the central spiritual teachings of Egypt is the life of Osiris, which reveals the process of attaining enlightenment or imperishability as it is called in Egyptian texts. Like Jesus, Osiris is killed and is then resurrected. It is the god Anubis who resurrects Osiris, and who thus formed a central symbolic part of the design of the Giza Plateau and the statue dedicated to this momentous spiritual event.
The Sphinx. In this photo the restoration block-work on the body of the sphinx can be seen clearly, in multiple layers, revealing beneath it a very weathered original stone. Concrete has been used to fill in the headdress as well as deep rivets in the body. Horizontal signs of weathering can be seen on the wall behind the sphinx that would have enclosed a lake (photo copyright Marek Kocjan, 2006).
Resurrection
Anubis attending the initiate who lies symbolically dead, to resurrect them.
In the sacred teachings of ancient Egypt, a person had to undergo a defined spiritual process to pass from mortality to immortality, which led from death to resurrection. Resurrection as a spiritual process can be found in ancient sacred teachings throughout the world and is associated with the time of the spring equinox the most dominant solar alignment of the Giza Plateau, which the Sphinx gazes precisely toward.
Resurrection was central to the life of the Egyptian god Osiris, just as it was in the lives of Jesus, Tammuz, Dionysus, Attis, Mithras, the Maize God Hun Hunahpu of the Mayans, etc., who all resurrected at the time of the spring equinox. The lives of these deities, although appearing in different cultures and times, symbolized the same universal spiritual process also symbolized by the Great Sphinx of Egypt, one of the most ancient and mysterious sacred sites in the world. Each of these deities showed the events and
processes involved in reaching enlightenment, which is why they contain so many similarities.
The God Anubis
Resurrection is always preceded by death both Jesus and Osiris were betrayed and killed before they were brought back to life to live eternally. In Egypt, Anubis has a central role in death and resurrection. In the life of Osiris, Anubis resurrects Osiris after he is betrayed and killed by his evil brother Seth.
Anpu (Anubis in Greek) is one of the most ancient gods of Egypt the record of his veneration pre-dates that even of Osiris. Anubis was depicted as a black recumbent jackal, or as a man with the head of a jackal, and presiding over the process of death. The jackal head is a sacred headdress Anubis wears in his role in the spiritual realms.
In Egypt, Anubis most famously appears in the scene of the weighing of the heart, illustrating events after death. The heart of the deceased is weighed by Anubis on the scales of divine law (called Maat, which is cosmic order) against a feather to determine how they lived their life, and based on that, what would happen to them next. This is an illustration of Anubis in his role as the head judge of divine law and justice, which he administers along with the other forty-two judges of the divine law, known in ancient Egyptian texts as "The Assessors of Maat" and the god Thoth, also depicted in this scene.
The god Anubis weighs the heart of the dead in the presence of the god Thoth and the forty-two judges of karma, before Osiris who after his resurrection, becomes judge of the dead. This signifies how the initiate (Osiris) achieves becoming a judge through fulfilling all divine laws, and is no longer judged by Anubis, head of the divine law.
Anubis and Inner Death
Anubis not only has a role in receiving the dead and judging them, but also in the esoteric process of inner death. Resurrection is always preceded by death, but this death is not a physical one, it is an inner one which takes place as part of a spiritual work. It involves the death of all that is evil, inferior, and dark within oneself, such as hatred, anger, jealousy, lust, etc., in a process of psychological and energetic purification.
In Egypt this turned into a religious belief (as it has happened in other religions) misinterpreted by later generations of people who had lost the ability to understand the esoteric meaning of Egypt s sacred texts. Pharaohs believed instead that their physical death would lead to physical resurrection in the afterlife, surrounding themselves with jewels and spells that would apparently assure them safe passage in the journey to reach immortality. However, the esoteric death is inner and its resurrection is achieved in life through a spiritual and alchemical work, and the Great Sphinx and life of Osiris, along with the life of many other deities, symbolizes how it takes place.
Ro-Setawe and the Necropolis are ancient names for the site of the Great Pyramids and Sphinx, and
Necropolis is a term which means graveyard. In ancient Egyptian texts Anubis was referred to as the Lord of Ro-Setawe, Anubis who presides over the Sacred Land, and Head of the Necropolis. These are all references to Anubis, the god of death, presiding over the Giza Plateau, which was known as the place of the dead.
The reference to the site of Giza being the place of the dead is not a reference to it being an actual graveyard (although the inhabitants of the site later interpreted it this way), but as a place of those who achieve an inner, psychological death. This finds its parallel in the Place of Skulls where Jesus was crucified, and the Avenue of the Dead at the Pyramids of Teotihuacán in Mexico where it is said men become Gods, which also shares other similarities. Little wonder that Anubis, the god with a central role in death and resurrection, stood guard over the site of Giza, dedicated to the spiritual process of attaining imperishability, in which inner death and resurrection were essential.
Anubis in his recumbent form lying atop a coffin. This statue was found in the treasures inside the tomb of Tutankhamun (photo copyright Jon Bodsworth, 2007).
Anubis was also known as the Master of Secrets, and was often depicted as a dog or jackal recumbent on a coffin, which was said to contain sacred secrets. Indeed, the Great Sphinx does stand guard over incredible secrets, as beneath it lies nine chambers, each containing an unknown metal object.
The Nine Layers of the Underworld
A team of researchers discovered that nine underground chambers lie beneath the Great Sphinx. These symbolize the nine layers of the underworld, which are also found symbolized in other ancient sites around the world, such as the nine terraces of the pyramid of Chichen Itza in Mexico and the nine chambers beneath Glastonbury Tor in England. The Mayans assigned nine levels to hell, just as Dante did in his Divine Comedy.
These chambers beneath the Sphinx represent the layers of hell which the initiate enters at death preceding resurrection, which is why Osiris is cast into the underworld after being killed by Seth, and Jesus descends into hell after his crucifixion. This hell is one experienced internally, where the initiate suffers hellish psychological states, and must achieve the death of these states in order to surface back from out of the underworld and resurrect, which is why in the quote below Unas is said to be weary of the Nine that he suffered, but now has no more time there in the underworld. The sacred secrets Anubis guards is the esoteric knowledge that the initiate gains.
He comes indeed, this Unas, weary of the Nine, an Imperishable spirit, he that bore more than you, he that suffered more than you, he that is more weary than you, he that became greater than you, he who will be happier than you, he who roars louder than you. You have no more time there! Lo, this is what Seth and Thoth have done, your two brothers, who could not bewail you!
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 218
Descending into the nine layers also represents the work in what is called the ninth sphere which is to work in the practice of sexual alchemy, in the womb of the earth which is the chaos and crucible of creation, to both destroy psychological states and to create immortal/imperishable spiritual parts within.
The Tomb
A jackal, the animal which Anubis is most often associated with, although his form may have originally been based on a species of dog that no longer exists (photo copyright wiki user Raoulduke47, 2009).
In the life of Jesus, Joseph of Arimathea wraps the body of the crucified Jesus in linen before he places it in a tomb, just as in the life of Osiris, Anubis conceals Osiris body in a tomb. The two Marys bring spices and perfumes to anoint the body of Jesus, just as Isis and Nephthys do to Osiris.
The secret ways of Ro-Setawe [the ancient site of Giza], The gate of the gods. Only one whose voice is heard May pass them . . . The secret way to which (only) Anubis has access In order to conceal the body of Osiris.
~ The Book of the One in the Netherworld
It is in the stone tomb (symbol of the womb of the mother goddess), which in Egypt was built into chambers of the pyramids, where the initiate, lying in the stone sarcophagus, is concealed and attended to by Anubis and resurrected, to emerge from the tomb as an immortal spiritual being, just as Jesus did.
These tombs were never designed for actual deceased bodies, but were used for initiatory rites to symbolize the process of inner death. This is why the stone sarcophaguses in the chambers of the Great Pyramids were found empty, and a stone sarcophagus surrounded by water has been discovered in underground tunnels beneath the Giza Plateau.
The Sacred Lake of Anpu (Anubis)
Through the research of Robert Temple, it has been revealed that the statue of Anubis as the Great Sphinx was once surrounded by a sacred lake in ancient texts it was referred to as the Jackal Lake, Lake of Fire, Lake of Dawn, Canal of the God, Canal of Anubis, Winding Waterway, Lake of Cool Water, Lake of the Netherworld, and Lake of Life. The recumbent body of Anubis would have been submerged beneath water, which was done for a symbolic reason.
O King, your shape is hidden like that of Anubis on his belly; receive your jackal-face and raise yourself, stand up.
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 677
Looking at a topographical map of the Giza Plateau, the Sphinx can be seen as set down in an area where the waters of the river Nile would have reached in ancient times during the annual inundation of the Nile to fill the Sphinx enclosure. The vertical sings of weathering (caused by rainfall pouring down) on the Sphinx and its surrounding enclosure, are accompanied by horizontal weathering (caused by water
moving side to side). Strange markings around the Sphinx enclosure may have been the location of sluice gates that retained water around the sphinx to hold the water of the lake.
A channel is also carved along the causeway that leads to the Sphinx. It empties into the Sphinx enclosure, and would have collected rain water runoff from the Giza Plateau to fill the lake. There are also quays protruding from the Valley Temple (which is located next to the Sphinx), so that the Sphinx and Giza area could have been approached by boat.
Purification of the Sexual Waters and the Four Bodies
The lake around the Great Sphinx was a symbol of the sexual waters/energies, which are purified alchemically in the spiritual work, and used to create the imperishable bodies of gold, which are the immortal vehicles of the soul. It is carried out within the initiate by the divine mother goddess and eternal feminine principle, who is sometimes symbolized as Isis and also as a serpent (the kundalini).
O King, your sister the Celestial Serpent has cleansed you upon the causeway in the meadow, you having appeared to them as a jackal. . . May you govern the spirits, may you control the Imperishable Stars.
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 690
The extract above refers to the alchemical cleansing of the initiate in the sacred lake of Anubis, which surrounded the Sphinx. The causeway referred to runs from the Sphinx to the second largest of the Great Pyramids, and is described as being in a meadow as in ancient times the Giza Plateau would have been a green and fertile place.
These are a complete set of four canopic jars, which were used by the Egyptians in the process of mummification and preparation for the afterlife. Each jar held a different organ, and each was guarded by a different god, which also corresponded to the four cardinal directions. Esoterically, these four jars represent the four bodies, which are physical, vital, astral, and mental.
In the Pyramid Texts, the initiate is cleansed in the lake surrounding the Sphinx in which four gods and four jars are involved. This symbolizes the four bodies of the initiate that are cleansed and purified alchemically: they are the physical, vital, astral, and mental bodies. These bodies need cleansing because they are the bodies through which the egos (inferior psychological states) manifest, and the sexual energies permeate. In the process of cleansing, the egos are destroyed and the sexual energies purified.
I travel the Winding Waterway . . . because I am pure, the son of a pure one, and I am purified with these four nemeset-jars of mine which are filled to the brim from the Canal of the God in Iseion [sanctuary of Isis], which possesses the breath of Isis the Great, and Isis the Great dries me as Horus. Let him come, for he is pure: so says the priest of R concerning me to the door-keeper of the firmament, and he announces me to those four gods who are upon the Canal of Kenzet [Land Beyond].
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 510
Anubis carries out the process of mummification. Notice the four jars beneath the table, which represent the four bodies that are purified alchemically (photo copyright wiki user Andre, 2009).
This lake in which the symbolic cleansing takes place is referred to as the Lake of the Netherworld because the lake is a symbol of the sexual energies/waters within the human being, and these energies permeate through the netherworld region of our subconscious. Our egos exist in this subconscious netherworld and are created from sexual energies (which are the fundamental creative energies in animals and humans). The underworld is a real place which we are intimately connected to through our psyche.
Being cleansed in the Lake of the Netherworld (and also Jackal Lake) is to purify the sexual energies/the waters from the egos through sexual alchemy.
Here the link between Anubis and the god Mercury whom he became associated with becomes clear, since the region of the dead, the netherworld which both Anubis and Mercury guide the initiate through, is the place in which the process of alchemical purification needs to take place preceding resurrection. The caduceus of Mercury, which the god Hermanubis also holds, is an alchemical symbol.
My father has remade his heart, the other having been removed for him because it objected to his ascending to the sky when he had waded in the waters of the Winding Waterway. Anubis comes and meets you! And Geb gives you his hand, O my father, (even) he who guards the earth and rules the spirits. I weep deeply, O my father. Oho!
Raise yourself, my father, receive these your four pleasant nemeset jars; bathe in the Jackal Lake, be cleansed in the Lake of the Netherworld, be purified. . . . Run your course, row over your waterway like R [the sun god] on the banks of the sky. O my father, raise yourself, go in your spirit-state.
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 512
In Egypt, Horus was the Christ (the Son in the divine triad of Father, Mother, and Son), just as Jesus was in Christianity, Quetzalcoatl was to the Mayans and Aztecs, and Viracocha to the Incans, Mithras was in Persia and Rome, etc. As well as Anubis, Horus was also said to resurrect Osiris, as it is the Christ/the Son within which resurrects in the initiate and purifies them. In the passage below the Christ purifies the internal bodies and energies of the initiate in the lake of Anubis.
Horus takes him to his side, he purifies this Unas [the initiate] in the Jackal-lake, he cleans the ka of this Unas in the Lake of Dawn, he rubs down the flesh of the Ka of this Unas as well as his own, with that which is at Re's side in the Akhet-horizon, with what he (Re) receives when the Two Lands (Egypt) are lighted and he opens the face of the gods.
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 268
Return to the Womb
The sacred lake was also a symbol of the primordial waters, the womb of the eternal Mother, to which the
Son (the initiate with the Christ within) must return in order to pass beyond death and rebirth. All that is born dies, and so to achieve immortality the Son must go back to the origin of life and death, and merge with the Mother by returning to the womb of creation. From there the initiate ascends to become one with the eternal Father, who is not born, and thus does not die. This is a going back to the first instance of creation and a return to wholeness in which the Father, Mother, and Son become one; in Egypt, this complete state of being was symbolized by the god Atum.
A diagram of an atom showing it is made up of protons (positive force, which is the Father), electrons (negative force, which is the Mother), and neutrons (which is the neutral and reconciling force, the Son). The word atom, is very similar to the name of the Egyptian god Atum, who symbolizes the unified Father, Mother, and Son.
The name Atum is very similar to the word atom, the basic unit of creation which contains protons, the positive force of creation (the Father); electrons, the negative force in creation (the Mother); and neutrons, the neutral force in creation (the Son). Ancient texts stated that Atum permeates all of creation.
The parallels between the scientific and spiritual principles reveal the depth of understanding once possessed by people in ancient Egypt.
In Egypt, Atum was the name of the first god that came into existence. He was self-engendered, and from him all other gods came into being. His name is interpreted as meaning complete one, lord of totality, and as finisher of the world. Atum symbolizes the Monad, the Being that emerged from the source before it divides into different parts and goes into the different dimensions. The spiritual work is to merge the different parts of one s Being together as a complete whole again, which is a return to the state Atum symbolizes a state of oneness and completion, but with full consciousness and knowledge gained from the experience of life in matter.
In Egypt, the process of creation is said to have begun when the god Atum emerged as a mound from out of the primordial waters. Similarly, creation emerges from the primordial waters in the ancient Vedas of the Hindus, in the story of Genesis in the Bible, and in the legends of the Incas. These primordial waters are those of the eternal feminine womb, which gives birth to all of creation. It is following this same process in reverse through which we return to the spirit who conceived us. At death, Osiris is said to return to the heart of Atum, and Atum is said to return all living beings and creation back into the primordial waters from which it came. In this nonexistence, it is said that Atum and Osiris will survive in the form of serpents; when all else passes, only those who resurrect and reach the state of imperishability as Atum will remain. Those who don t awaken are submerged back into the ocean of nonexistence at the end of the great cycle of their lives.
Osiris: But how long shall I live?
Atum: You will live more than millions of years, an era of millions, but in the end I will destroy everything that I have created, the earth will become again part of the Primeval Ocean, like the Abyss of waters in their original state. Then I will be what
will remain, just I and Osiris, when I will have changed myself back into the Old Serpent who knew -no man and saw no god. How fair is that which I have done for Osiris, a fate different from that of all the other gods. I have given him the region of the dead while I have put his son Horus as heir upon his throne in the Isle of Fire, I have thus made his place for him in the Boat of Millions of Years, in that Horus remains on his throne to carry on his work.
~ The Book of the Dead, Chapter 175 [Chapter Clxxv.]: (1) The Chapter of Not Dying a Second Time
Egyptian painting of the first sunrise at the dawning of creation from the primeval mound that arose from out of the waters. At either side are the goddesses of the north and south, pouring out the waters that surround the mound. The eight stick figures are the gods of the Ogdoad, hoeing the soil. The large circle is the mound which divides into two (male and female), and from which the third is born, the Son/sun.
With its body set down in the lake, the Sphinx would have appeared as a mound, just like the one that emerged from the primordial waters at the beginning of creation, which is why its body is referred to as Atum in the Pyramid Texts.
Your arms are Atum, your shoulders are Atum, your belly is Atum, your back is Atum,
your hinder-parts are Atum, your legs are Atum, your face is Anubis.
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 213
The Sphinx therefore symbolizes the return to a complete and imperishable state of being, in which the Son, Mother, and Father unite to become Atum. Atum is said to be a god of post-existence and pre-existence, being that which is both before and after existence. Those who resurrect (becoming one with the great Mother), and later ascend (becoming one with the great Father), conquer back their state of wholeness as Atum, being beyond birth and death, as one who is eternal.
You make yourself free of what should be washed away for Atum in [Heliopolis, and you go down] with him. You judge the wants in the Netherworld and stand (as king) over the places of the primeval ocean. You come into being with your father Atum, you are high with your father Atum, you rise with your father Atum. The wants (of the Netherworld) are severed from you, your head (is held) by the nurse of Heliopolis [the city of the sun].
You have power over your body, there is no one to oppose you. You are born
because of Horus (in you), you are conceived because of Seth (in you). You have purified yourself in the Hawk nome (Third Nome of Lower Egypt), you have received your purification in the Uninjured-Ruler nome (Thirteenth of Lower Egypt) before your father, before Atum.
You have come into being, you have become high, you have become a spirit! Cool it is for you in the embrace of your father, in the embrace of Atum.
Atum! Elevate to you this Unas [the initiate], enfold him in your embrace! This is your son of your body, eternally.
~ The Pyramid Texts
Overcoming the Law
An example of the hauntingly beautiful walls inside the pyramid of Teti I in Saqqara. They are inscribed with what makes up The Pyramid Texts containing esoteric knowledge from a far more ancient time.
As head of the divine law, Anubis stands as gatekeeper between the realm of earthly mortality and spiritual imperishability, letting only those who meet the spiritual requirements pass. On the Giza Plateau as the original form of the Sphinx, Anubis stood at the mystical gateway between the earthly and eternal realm, found in the moment of transition between winter and spring on the dawning of the spring equinox.
The earth speaks: The doors of the earth-god are opened for you, the doors of Geb are thrown open for you, you come forth at the voice of Anubis, he makes a spirit of you.
~ The Pyramid Texts, utterance 437
Anubis, the counter of hearts, deducts Osiris N. from the gods who belong to the earth, (and assigns him) to the gods who are in heaven.
~ The Pyramid Texts, utterance 577
As someone progresses in the work to awakening, they fulfill and thus overcome the different cosmic laws that are upon them and the world, administered by Anubis. The whole of nature and creation is ordered and exists under laws, which govern the way things grow, move, etc., and are studied in physics, biology, genetics, geology, and many other sciences. It is said that in the beginning, Atum first created
life and order and that they were not separate; this order is the laws that are intrinsic to life.
However, there are not just laws that govern the physical and natural world, but also those that govern the matters of other dimensions, which include energetic, psychological, and spiritual principles. These laws include those that apply to human interaction, behavior, and spiritual development.
At the stage just preceding resurrection, there are only three laws remaining, which correspond to the three universal principles of creation, which are Father, Mother, and Son. When someone resurrects, the Mother and Son become one. From here is the ascension where someone then becomes one with the Father, and is when the male and female aspects of the being are made whole again. This is a going back to the first instance of creation and the original unified being Atum, which exists under only one law and is therefore no longer under the rule of Anubis. In order to reach this, the initiate must pay all their karma and fulfill all divine laws to pass beyond the laws which Anubis administers.
In the Coffin Texts, the initiate states I have come . . . to enter the secret gateway By which Anubis is initiated. I have come to Ro-Setawe [name of the Giza Plateau in ancient Egypt] In order to know the Mysteries of the Netherworld Into which Anubis is initiated. And also, I have come in order to enter the gateway that is protected by Anubis.
Anubis is the one who must be satisfied that the initiate has fulfilled everything they need to in terms
of the law, before releasing them to become as The Pyramid Texts state, one who is no longer judged, but who fulfils and judges the law themselves.
Atum, this your son is here, Osiris, whom you have preserved alive. He lives! He lives! This Unas lives! He is not dead, this Unas is not dead! He is not gone down, this Unas is not gone down! He has not been judged, this Unas has not been judged! He judges, this Unas judges!
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 219
Horus, hurry! Announce to the gods of the East and their spirits : He comes indeed, this Unas, an Imperishable Spirit! Whom he wills that he live, he lives. Whom he will that he die, he dies.
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 217
O Osiris, this Unas comes indeed, weary of the Nine, an Imperishable Spirit, to reckon hearts, to take kas, to grant kas. His every appointment obliges one (to do his duty), him who he has elevated, and him who applied to him.
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 218
After his resurrection, Osiris becomes the judge of the dead, just as Anubis had been. The initiate receives their jackal face, which to achieve the state of existing under the one law of heaven.
O King, your shape is hidden like that of Anubis on his belly; receive your jackal-face and raise yourself, stand up.
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 677
The Astronomical Alignments of the Sphinx
A diagram outlining the constellation of what we now know as Leo. Regulus, the king star, is the largest in the constellation, and sits at the heart (image copyright Torsten Bronger, 2010).
The Spring Equinox
Today, the Sphinx still gazes due east, precisely aligned to the rising sun on the spring equinox a time intimately connected to resurrection not only in Egypt, but in spiritual teachings throughout the world.
Jesus, Tammuz, Dionysus, Attis, Mithras, and many others were resurrected at this time of year. The spring equinox is when the days first begin to grow longer than the nights, and thus life emerges from the death of winter. In its deeper spiritual meaning, the sun, cosmic symbol of the Christ/the Son, rises to overpower darkness.
The Constellation of Leo
Between approximately 10,970 and 8,810 BC (although some have given dates thousands of years earlier) the Sphinx would have also gazed directly at the constellation of what we now call Leo, which rose just before dawn on the spring equinox due to the precession of the equinoxes. The constellation of Leo is depicted as a recumbent lion, which matches the form of the Sphinx.
Leo as a Dog, Not a Lion
The first record of the constellation of Leo appears in 1,530 BC in Babylonia and was later adopted in Egypt. However, the Sphinx pre-dates this time by many thousands of years perhaps being built during 10,500 BC or even earlier. Therefore it is possible that the constellation of Leo was seen by the builders of the Sphinx not as a lion, but as the celestial representation of Anubis in his form as a recumbent dog.
The long flat back, curved head and protruding snout, and paws out front, match the form of the Sphinx and the hieroglyphic representation of the recumbent Anubis in his jackal form in the most ancient known sacred texts in the world, The Pyramid Texts.
The temple of Osireion at Abydos in Egypt. It shares many architectural similarities with the Valley Temple beside the Sphinx, as well as a connection to the deity Anubis as head of the underworld in alignment with the sun and constellation of Leo (photo copyright wiki user RsAzevedo, 2008).
The ancient site of Abydos in Egypt further connects Anubis to the constellation of Leo. At this ancient
site dated to between 6,000 3,100 BC (although possibly much older) lies the mysterious temple known as the Osireion where a deity with the head of a dog and that later became associated with Anubis was worshiped. The Osireion temple was unearthed during the construction of the temple of Seti I around 1,280 BC and again later along with the temple of Seti I in AD 1902, after both had become covered in sand together.
The Osireion temple closely resembles the unique architecture of the Valley Temple which is located next to the Sphinx both are made out of huge unadorned granite blocks, which also look very similar to Stonehenge. Like the Sphinx and Valley Temple, the Osireion was covered in sand and forgotten thousands of years ago, periodically being rediscovered even by the Pharaohs of Egypt themselves who renovated them. Like the Sphinx and Great Pyramids, the Osireion also encodes the numbers of the Great Year (precession of the equinoxes), the golden mean, and key solar alignments which include the summer solstice, and both sites were centered around the veneration of Anubis. This makes the link between these two sites very strong it appears that at the very least, the ancient knowledge of the builders of the Great Pyramids and Sphinx was passed on to those who built the Osireion.
The Valley Temple located beside the Great Sphinx of Egypt. It shares remarkable similarities in building style with the Osireion, another ancient temple. Both are made out of huge unadorned granite blocks (photo copyright Daniel Mayer, 2008).
On the summer solstice, the light of the setting sun shines through a nearby gap in the Libyan Hills, which intersects the Osireion temple. Due to the precession of the equinoxes, or the progress of the Great Year, the summer solstice occurred in the constellation of Leo in the era of 4,400 BC. During this time at Abydos a deity called Khent-Amenty (also Khentiamentiu or Khentyamentw) was worshipped as a central figure.
Khent-Amenty was depicted with the head of a dog, but was also a variant of a lion deity, and later became associated with Anubis. He was known as "the head of the west" which was a reference to him as the guardian of the underworld, the land of the dead. The underworld was believed to be accessed through the gap in the Libyan hills, which lay to the west of Abydos, and which the solstice sun shone through in alignment with the Osireion temple.
Equally curious is that Khent-Amenty, a dog-like deity shown recumbent on a black standard, may in fact reflect an earlier understanding of the zodiac. The guardian of the west suggests a match for that guardian of the east, the Sphinx, and both can be related to the same constellation, that of Leo. Primitive cultures have often seen Leo as a dog-like creature, and it has even been suggested that the Sphinx originally depicted a dog.
At the time of the earliest pre-dynastic cultures at Abydos, the ancestors of the Thinites around the turn of the fifth millennium BCE, the summer solstice sun was in Leo. So, standing in the sacred grove on top of the Osireion mound, one would have seen the sun set, and there, sparkling in the night sky, would have been Khent-Amenty, the black dog of Leo, guarding the path of eternal life.
~ Vincent Bridges, Abydos, the Osireion and Egyptian Sacred Science
Alignment with Leo During 10,500 BC
The Sphinx is also mysteriously set low down in the Giza plateau, and beside a giant causeway running from the second largest of the Great Pyramids. The angle of the causeway is slightly offset due east by about 14°. Egyptologists argue that this was because the Sphinx and causeway were incorporated later into the Giza design. Researchers Graham Hancock and Robert Bauval discovered however, that this offset and lowering of the Sphinx mirrored the movement of the constellation of Leo during the era around 10,500 BC at the spring equinox.
When one stands on the causeway, looking toward the Sphinx and the rising sun, one would have witnessed the constellation of what we now know as Leo rising in the sky before dawn so that it would appear head first, as if its body was submerged by the horizon, before fully appearing in its recumbent position. At this moment, one could look across to the Sphinx and see only its head, as if it were submerged in the horizon just like the constellation, with both of them aligned to one another.
The rising of the constellation of Leo preceding the sun mirrors the role Anubis has in the resurrection
of the initiate. Anubis, symbolized by the constellation of Leo, appears at the horizon where the sun will rise. The sun must pass through this constellation and the gaze of Anubis (as the Sphinx), to leave the earth and ascend into the sky, the realm of imperishability. At dawn, the sun emerges from the horizon, symbolizing the emergence of the initiate with the Christ/Son within from out of the underworld (symbolized by the nine chambers beneath the Sphinx that represent the nine layers of hell/the underworld). As the sun rises, it passes through the symbolic gateway created by the gaze and constellation of Anubis, thus overcoming the divine laws which Anubis administers.
Additionally, at around 10,500 BC the Great Pyramids also aligned with the three stars of Orion s belt. Therefore the monuments of the Giza plateau all had their most dominant alignments around this time, which along with other evidence, reveals that they were probably all built together as part of a master plan.
The Duat Mirrored by the Great Pyramids and Sphinx
The three Great Pyramids of Egypt superimposed over the three stars of Orion's belt, showing their correlation (copyright wiki user Davkal, 2009).
In ancient Egypt, the realm of the Duat was the dwelling place of the gods, a place that lay beyond the physical world in the area of the constellation of Orion. In the ancient Egyptian text The Book of What is in the Duat it states, whoever shall make the copy of the Duat, and shall know it upon the Earth, it shall act as a magical protector for him, both in Heaven and in Earth, unfailingly, regularly and eternally,
alluding to why the ancient builders of the Giza Plateau aligned their structures to this other-worldly realm of the sun and stars.
The Great Pyramids align to the three stars of Orion s belt. To the ancient Egyptians, Orion was the constellation of Osiris, in whose life the process of attaining imperishability was symbolized. In the Pyramid Texts, Unas [the Pharaoh] journeys through the day and night sky to become the star Sabu, or Orion.
Behold, he has come as Orion, behold, Osiris has come as Orion ...
~ The Pyramid Texts, Utterance 819
Each year the sun makes a journey through the sky drifting between the constellation of Orion, Leo, and across the Milky Way, symbolically representing the events of the life of Osiris, which are then mirrored at the Giza plateau. Orion corresponds with the Great Pyramids and Osiris, the Milky Way corresponds to the Nile and the eternal divine feminine known as the goddess Hathor, and Leo most likely with Anubis who resurrects Osiris and is symbolized by the Sphinx.
In the story of Osiris, he is betrayed by Seth (just as Jesus was by Judas). Seth seals Osiris in a coffin and then throws the coffin into the Nile River, symbolic of the Milky Way, which flows out to the sea
this is the return of the initiate to the womb of the great Mother, the primordial waters of creation.
In Mayan and Aztec cultures this is symbolized as being swallowed by the serpent, and is found in the Biblical story of Jonah being swallowed by the whale. These symbols represent the initiate, the Son, becoming one with the divine feminine principle. But a return to the womb is also a time of death, as it is a return to the place which precedes birth to the imperishable source of all life.
Incredibly, the passion (betrayal, death, and resurrection) of Osiris is symbolized by the structures of the Giza Plateau which align to the celestial counterparts that enacted this same drama in the heavens every year.
The Use of Universal Principles in the Giza Design
Diagram of the Great Pyramid of Egypt showing its interior passages and chambers. Both the ascending passage (leading to what is called the "King's Chamber") and the descending passage (leading down into the subterranean chamber) are at an angle of 26 degrees, 33 minutes, and 54 seconds.
There is an ancient maxim of wisdom that states as above, so below. The universal principles of life exist in everything that is why the same mathematical logarithmic spiral is found in the shape of a shell, and the spiral of a galaxy. The same principles that govern the movement of the heavens, the formation and structure of life, and the cycles of growth and decay, etc., also govern the spiritual development of the human being. The whole of life is created for beings to awaken, and is intrinsically imbued with the wisdom of this process so that we can remember who we are and find our way back
home.
This is why the builders of the Great Pyramids and Sphinx aligned their sacred structures to the movements of the heavens using sacred geometry, with a precision that is unmatched even today. A study of fifty Egyptian temples revealed that the builders had used highly advanced sacred mathematics in the construction of every single one. A universal principle manifests in numbers, sound, color, natural cycles, the formation of life, astronomy, etc., which are studied in separate and distinct disciplines. However, these are all expressions of the same universal truths. By using the expression of particular principles, whether it be astronomical or mathematical, the builders of the Great Pyramids and Sphinx, were able to create places that harnessed these principles energetically and multi-dimensionally, and could be experienced and understood on many different levels beyond the mind.
Researcher Robert Temple discovered that throughout the Giza site, an angle of 26 degrees, 33
minutes, and 54 seconds had been used. This angle is the only angle that is produced in the only triangle constructed by means of the "golden ratio," and has been used both in two and three dimensions, between all the pyramids, in the slope of the passages inside the pyramids and beside the Sphinx, in the design of the inner chambers, and between the Sphinx and the two largest pyramids. The incredible invisible
three-dimensional layout of the Giza Plateau, with its stunning multiplicity of sacred geometry from every point and down to minute details with unmatched accuracy (so much that today researchers have barely scratched the surface), reveals that the Sphinx and pyramids were built and laid out according to a unified master plan.
This same angle was also used throughout Egyptian artwork, often as the angle the initiate who was being resurrected was tilted on, revealing why the ancient builders wished to harness the energetic power found in this mathematical truth at the site of the Great Sphinx and Pyramids so dedicated to the process of resurrection.
Osiris between the Paws of the Anubis Sphinx
Ram-headed sphinx at the Temple of Karnak with the figure of a pharaoh between its paws (photo copyright Hedwig Storch, 2009).
Critics of the theory that the Sphinx was originally carved as Anubis state that the head of the Sphinx is made of a harder and heavier stone than the body, caused by the strata in the bedrock from which the Sphinx was carved, and that because of this, the body would not have been able to support the weight of Anubis head without it falling off.
However, the ancient Egyptians were master builders. Their statues were built taking into account the fragility of protruding parts like hands and heads, and they incorporated reinforcements into the design to ensure they would last.
Here is an image of an actual Egyptian Anubis sphinx with a pharaoh between its paws. It was built as part of the Ramesseum between 1279 1212 BC.
There is a large bulge on the chest of the Sphinx. This bulge, now almost completely weathered away, could once have been the image of Osiris or equivalent deity, which would have supported the head of Anubis. Sphinx statues in Egypt often show the figure of a pharaoh between their paws, and this may have been a symbolic design which carried through thousands of years even though the original form of the Great Sphinx did not.
In the constellation of Leo, which the builders of the sphinx may have mirrored in their design, the brightest star of the constellation is found at the place of the heart. Uncannily, this star called Regulus, is also known as the King Star. This may also indicate why the pharaoh/king came to be situated standing at the heart of sphinxes and again alludes to the possibility that the bulge on the chest of the Great Sphinx could have been the King or initiate, represented by Osiris.
In the process of resurrection, Anubis and Osiris are intimately linked, as it is Anubis who facilitates the resurrection of Osiris, and it is on the spring equinox, which the sphinx gazes at, that the constellation of Anubis (Leo) rises before the sun (symbol of the resurrected Osiris as his son Horus), thus bringing the sun to life. In The Book of the Caverns it refers to those who are between his [Anubis ] arms, which is an esoteric reference that may have been symbolized by the Sphinx with Osiris between its arms. In the Book of the Dead, Anubis is depicted laying his hands upon Osiris, saying I have come to protect Osiris. Sphinxes later had statues of pharaohs between their paws as they were said to protect the pharaoh. This may show that although the knowledge of what the Sphinx originally was, the idea of the pharaoh being protected between its paws continued.
As the spring equinox sun rose, signaling the resurrection of Osiris as his son Horus, the sun would have emerged from the watery horizon, and created a path of light across the river Nile that would have reached the Sphinx and possibly a statue of Osiris between its paws. The statue of Osiris would have had its lower body beneath the water, as he was often depicted this way to show his symbolic resurrection
rising from out of the underworld and emerging from the primordial waters of the womb and creation to attain eternal life.
How the Sphinx Was Lost
A partially cleared Sphinx buried in sand up to its shoulders, after having been buried up to its neck. This photo was taken around 1889, but the Sphinx had been buried like this at least once before preceding 1400 BC (image credit the collection of Cornell University Library).
The knowledge of the original form of the Sphinx was lost thousands of years ago, as it was abandoned, vandalized, re-carved, and restored. Its origins are still unknown as there are no references to who built it, and there are many signs showing that it came from a time before recorded Egyptian history.
A number of researchers and archaeologists argue that the Sphinx and its surrounding enclosure show signs of heavy weathering from water. Deep rivets in the stone, which have almost eroded the original form of the Sphinx away entirely, were created by a long period of heavy rainfall. Today, the Giza area is a desert the last time the Giza plateau had heavy rainfall was at a time called the Nabtian Fluvial that lasted from 10,000 to 3,000 BC. This means that the Sphinx would have had to have existed during this time, but could have been built earlier possibly being of pre-ice age and pre-flood origin, and built by Atlanteans. Archaeologist Robert Schoch places the age of the Sphinx to at least as early as 5,000 to 7,000 BC, but researcher John Anthony West believes it could even be as old as 12,500 BC or more.
The original builders of the Sphinx are not known. Instead, using circumstantial evidence, mainstream Egyptology has promoted the idea that the pharaoh Khafre built the Sphinx and the second largest of the Great Pyramids at around 2,500 BC, even though there are no references to Khafre building either.
Restoration block work on the Sphinx is believed to date to as early as this time which would indicate that the Sphinx was already weathered and in need of restoration by then.
The oldest known sacred texts in the world are called The Pyramid Texts. They have been dated to soon after Khafre s reign (around 2,400 to 2,300 BC), and were discovered on the walls of a number of pyramids at a site called Saqqara. They contain the oldest references to the Sphinx and Great Pyramids, in which they speak of Anpu/Anubis surrounded by a sacred lake at the Giza Plateau. This reveals that at this time, the Sphinx may have still retained its original form. They do not contain references however, to who built the Sphinx or Great Pyramids, leaving the time before around 3,000 BC as a veritable blackout in the history of Egypt.
A few hundred years after Khafre s reign, Egypt was hit with droughts, floods, and plagues for around 150 years. During this time (around 2,150 to 2,040 BC) social order broke down and mobs plundered and vandalized the Giza site. The Sphinx may have been severely damaged during these riots (causing such a disfigurement to the head that the knowledge of what it was may have been lost, also giving cause for later pharaohs to restore the face with their own image), and many artifacts and texts looted and destroyed. The gold pinnacle that topped the Great Pyramid was probably removed at this time. All that survives is what is set in stone and was too large to destroy the core structures of the Great Pyramids and Sphinx with their encoded and unified mathematical, astronomical, and esoteric wisdom.
Human headed sphinxes line a causeway at the Luxor Temple in Egypt. These were a later addition to the temple.
Human headed sphinxes such as these did not start appearing in Egypt until around 1800 BC (photo copyright wiki user Hajor, 2001).
Social order returned to Egypt in around 2,000 BC. After this the head of the Sphinx was re-carved at least once, leaving the final image of pharaoh Amenemhet II (not Khafre or Khufu, who have been attributed with building it, and look nothing like it) who reigned from 1,876 to 1,842 BC. By this time sphinxes with lion s bodies and the heads of pharaohs or rams were appearing as statues. It is clear that the knowledge of what the Sphinx had been was already lost by the Egyptians at large themselves.
Then, the Sphinx itself was nearly totally lost. Today the area around the Sphinx and pyramids is a parched, sandy desert. In fact, periodically for hundreds and thousands of years at a time, the Sphinx has been covered up to its neck in sand. The famous Dream Stella between the Sphinx s paws records how the pharaoh Thutmose IV, in around 1,400 BC, had a dream beneath the head of the Sphinx that at the time protruded above the sand. In the dream the Sphinx spoke to Thutmose IV saying that if he restored the Sphinx, in return the Sphinx would make him king.
This reveals that by 1,400 BC the Sphinx had already been long neglected to the sands of time. Rain
and the once lush surrounds had long since departed the area, as well as the original civilization of Giza.
The focus of Egyptian culture had moved elsewhere.
By the time Thutmose IV had his dream, the Sphinx s head had already been altered and made into the face of a pharaoh. Anyone who views the Sphinx today can see the incredible disproportion between the tiny head of the Sphinx with its large, elongated body. This disproportion was created through one, successively re-carving the head, making it smaller each time; and two, adding block work casing to parts of the Sphinx s body which had the effect of enlarging it.
Images and statues of Anubis/Anpu in his jackal/dog form, associated with death and resurrection continued however, even though his association with the Sphinx had been severed. This knowledge survived through sacred texts that were passed down over thousands of years, with older texts becoming reincorporated into newer ones.
The Sphinx was vandalized once more by a fanatical Muslim, who hacked at the nose, which is still missing today. Around the same time in AD 1300 after an earthquake shook Cairo, the Great Pyramids were stripped of their outer casing to rebuild the city.
From at least 2,500 BC successive restorations have been done on the Sphinx, right up until the present day. Ancient Egyptian block work which covers the lower part of the Sphinx s body, including the tail and paws, was later added to by the Greeks and Romans who used the Sphinx as a place of worship during their occupations of Egypt. This has been further added to by modern stones. The addition of all these restoration stones has had the effect of widening the torso, massively enlarging the paws, and possibly adding the curled up tail, to create a leonine form instead. It is now impossible to pull back these stones (no one would give permission) to reveal the original form of the torso, paws, and tail. The Sphinx has also been concreted, lengthening the pharaoh s headdress, smoothing the neck, and filling in huge gaping rivets in the body.
In our times the Sphinx is no longer a site of sacred reverence, but has morphed into a star attraction, replicated in Las Vegas, completely detached from its original esoteric origins. However, through the experience of the same sacred knowledge of the original builders, the Sphinx can once again be understood.
The Gradual Loss of the Esoteric Knowledge of Ancient Egypt
The pyramids at Saqqara in Egypt which contain the oldest known sacred texts in the world, The Pyramid Texts.
These pyramids are clearly poor imitations of the Great Pyramids, and so the texts they contain are also likely to be handed down from a much more ancient and pristine source (photo copyright wiki user Hajor, 2002).
There is no evidence to suggest that the Great Pyramids were ever used as the tombs of pharaohs, although later pyramids were. They served an entirely different and esoteric purpose. What happened to Egypt, probably a number of times, as has happened to all original esoteric sites and cultures, is that the people there declined in spiritual knowledge. While the ancient sites themselves preserve the original understanding of spirituality, the people who inhabit them invariably lose it as the cycles of nature dictate.
What we see throughout history, repeatedly all over the world, is that the knowledge of spirituality is lost as people themselves lose the capacity to understand and value it. Eventually, the knowledge is turned into a blind religion, the real esoteric practitioners are pushed out, the knowledge becomes distorted, given meanings it never had, and taken over by megalomaniacs and those with entirely selfish and malevolent agendas who then use it as a tool to control and enslave people, at times inverting the practice of the teachings of light into black magic with blood rituals, sacrifice, violence, etc. When the knowledge of spiritual principles is lost, society declines morally (spiritually), often they are no longer
able to hold themselves together, and are destroyed. This sometimes allows other civilizations to rise and give the spiritual knowledge anew in a different form. Life moves in cycles and as Atlantis fell, so too will this civilization. This is the cycle of life and death that is visible in all of creation.
Ancient Egypt was undoubtedly once inhabited by a highly spiritually advanced and intelligent people; its greatest achievements are its oldest. There is also no doubt that it eventually descended into a religion ruled by a megalomaniac elite scenes at temples even came to depict festivals of drunkenness.
Originally the Great Pyramids of Egypt were built free of any attribution and were dedicated to the sacred initiatory rites. Later, lavish tombs were created only for Pharaohs and nobles to assure them safe passage in the afterlife, laden with riches, and inscribed with various parts of esoteric teachings.
This knowledge, which the elite had reserved for themselves, was eventually interpreted by the public and mass moral decline and degeneration set in; excavations have uncovered caches of millions of slaughtered and mummified animals (including newborn puppies) used to appease the gods. One dating from around 747 BC was dedicated to the worship of Anubis in which dogs were bred specifically to be killed and mummified only moments after being born. Obviously this has nothing to do with Anubis in any real sense and showed just how far society in Egypt had strayed from the true knowledge.
The priests of the once sacred temples, started taking money and gifts for people to buy their way into heaven, rather than upholding the principles of divine cosmic order. This kind of behavior illustrates why the esoteric knowledge was always kept so secret to maintain its sanctity, and ensure its use for good and rightful purposes by those who knew how to use it. As Jesus would say don't throw your pearls before swine lest they trample them underfoot. Not only does the knowledge get trampled upon, but also its practitioners when placed before uncomprehending people.
Spiritual Knowledge Turned into a Religion of the Afterlife
The golden mask of Psusennes I (photo copyright Brett Weinstein).
The history of Egypt spans many thousands of years during which time the esoteric teachings became a religion merely of the afterlife. Sacred initiatory texts which explain the passage of the initiate in life, through the tests and trials of the process of enlightenment, became interpreted as the passage of the soul only after death, as inner death became confused with physical death.
The Egyptians depicted how unless one attains a spiritual stage, a person does not have immortality, but continues in the deathly dream of the subconscious before entering the jaws of the Egyptian crocodile goddess Ammit known as "the eater of the dead" after the circuit of lives, to be given over to eventual destruction in the underworld, or hell, which the Egyptians called the Place of Annihilation. This was the fate of the evil dead described by the Egyptians as it is in many other spiritual teachings.
The way to avoid this annihilation became distorted over time. It was originally through esoteric inner transformation, but it was later supposedly reached through repeating spells, by being buried with charms, and inside lavish tombs. Over time, the understanding of spiritual principles was replaced by the material or empty symbolism, whose meanings are either devoid of esoteric principles or are simply mundane.
I have passed by the roads of Rosetau [ancient name for Giza plateau] by water and on land; these roads are those of Osiris; they are in the sky. If a man knows the Spell for going down into them, he will be like a god directed by the followers of Thoth. He will indeed go down to every heaven to which he desires to descend. But if he knows not this Spell for passing on these roads, he will fall a prey to the tribunal of the dead, his destiny being that of one who has nothing, and is without (his) justification eternally.
~ The Book of the Two Ways
Instead the focus of the religion became a lavish preparation for the journey in the afterlife, rather than making the journey to attain enlightenment and immortality (or imperishability as it was known in Egypt) within life itself. For enlightenment itself, material tombs and riches are useless as we only take what we have within ourselves beyond death, and that depends on what we create spiritually inside ourselves in life. There is no doubt the Egyptians inherited an incredible knowledge of the realm of the afterlife, but the initiates, the early elites, recognized that this realm did not belong only to death but could be accessed in life, and experienced through having out-of-body experiences.
Although the sacred esoteric texts of Egypt became a religion that had steered away from the esoteric toward the mundane, the legacy of ancient Egypt is so great that the knowledge contained in its structures and teachings have remained a source of guidance for initiates throughout the ages.
Conclusion
Sun at the pinnacle of the Great Pyramid of Egypt (photo copyright Nina Aldin Thune, 2005).
What is generally known about the Sphinx and the pyramids has been colored by thousands upon thousands of years of culture, multiple restorations, additions, and changes in form and function. The Sphinx isn't what some have come to believe a bizarre statue dedicated to a megalomaniac pharaoh, but is a sacred esoteric symbol of one of the most significant stages in spiritual transformation, and an integral part of a message of enlightenment left in the Giza complex by an advanced people long ago.
Anpu/Anubis was the Sphinx who stood as the guard at the passage between those belonging to the physical, earthly realm, and those who had attained immortality, making sure that only those who fulfilled the requirements of resurrection passed through. For a few today, the process of spiritual resurrection is as relevant and important as ever in the purpose of life; Anpu and the gods of ancient Egypt watch over the sacred process; while the Giza Plateau still serves as a site for rites of initiation and spiritual resurrection, of a part of human experience that is hidden to the uninitiated, which takes place beyond the physical body.
SUMMER SOLSTICE
Ascent to the Spiritual Father and Unification of the
Three Forces of Creation
CHAPTER TEN
The Spiritual Meaning of the Summer Solstice
Stonehenge which has multiple alignments to the summer solstice (photo copyright flickr user Simon Wakefield, 2008).
The summer solstice is a time to celebrate the light of consciousness within ourselves and within each and every person, and to reflect upon the potential for consciousness to awaken.
The progress of the sun throughout the year symbolizes the process of attaining enlightenment, and the summer solstice is the final climax of this journey as the day of most light in the year. It symbolizes the ascension found in many great spiritual teachings. At the spring equinox, the resurrection and return of the
Son/sun to the Mother goddess is celebrated. Following this, the summer solstice symbolizes the return/ascension to the Great Father Spirit. It is a time to celebrate the triumph of light over darkness in the individual, and the return to wholeness in which the Son, Mother Goddess, and Father God become one great unified consciousness a complete, whole, and powerful light that enlightens the individual.
The Druids, ancient Egyptians, Mayans, Essenes, Romans, and many others have aligned their sacred sites to the summer solstice and conducted ceremonies on this day. At the Great Pyramids of Egypt the summer solstice sun crowns the head of the Sphinx; the Druids celebrated the marriage of heaven and earth and the defeat of the dark god of the year just as the Egyptians celebrated the defeat of the dark god Seth by Horus, the sun; and in Rome the festival of Vestalia continued a Druid tradition of guarding the sacred fire.
Light is spiritual in its nature, and so the sun and stars have a spiritual significance that has its root in higher dimensions in many ancient teachings they are described as the source of creation. The summer solstice is therefore a highly spiritual time. The summer solstice is described as the gate of ascent out of this world into the realm of spirit by both Krishna, in the famous text The Bhavagad Gita, and in the designs of the secret caves of Mithras.
Mother, Father, Son, and the Feathered Serpent
Throughout ancient teachings there are incredible similarities a divine Son, born to a virgin Mother Goddess and great hidden Father, goes through a series of trials before being betrayed and then resurrecting. The events in the life of this divine Son and savior nearly always correspond to the solar year and other astrological events.
These famous trinities of Father, Mother, and Son actually symbolize the fundamental energies and forces that exist within creation found in atoms, the basic building blocks of all matter, as the three forces of positive, negative, and neutral. Paracelsus, the great alchemist of the Middle Ages, saw the cosmos as being fashioned from three spiritual substances or principles called a tria prima, which the alchemical substances of salt, sulphur, and mercury signified salt as substance and solidity, mercury as that which is transformative and fusible, and sulphur as binding these two.
As what is above relates to what is below, these three primary forces of the universe are also central
to the awakening of consciousness and why the stories of Mother Goddess, Great Father, and divine Son also contained messages about the process of an individual reaching enlightenment. The Mother, Father, and Son are not only universal forces, but are also higher parts of each individual s consciousness that exist in more spiritual dimensions and which someone reunites with in the process of enlightenment.
To achieve full self-realization an initiate must return to the source of creation, the Absolute, where all is one. To do that the different parts of the Being that were divided in creation must unite to form one whole, as it is not possible to enter the Absolute divided; we must return as one as we left, but with self-consciousness from the experience of existence in matter. When the three forces of creation Father, Mother, and Son are one and have returned to the divine source, the initiate has gone through the process of creation in reverse and re-absorbed the principles of life and divinity.
It is by love, that the Heavenly Father and the Earthly Mother and the Son of Man become one. For the spirit of the Son of Man was created from the spirit of the Heavenly Father, and his body from the body of the Earthly Mother. Become,
therefore, perfect as the spirit of your Heavenly Father and the body of your Earthly Mother are perfect.
~ The Essene Gospel of Peace
This fusion of Mother, Father, and Son has been symbolized as the feathered serpent and can be found as the Mayan and Aztec god Quetzalcoatl, the Persian and Roman God Mithras, and prolifically throughout Egypt. The god Quetzalcoatl, Mithras, and Horus is the Son; the serpent is a symbol of the Mother; and the feathers symbolic of the Father it is from the union of Father, Mother, and Son that Quetzalcoatl/Mithras/Horus becomes the feathered serpent.
From left to right-Mithras is depicted in the center of the zodiac with the sun atop his head, a serpent wrapped around his body, and wings on his back; Quetzalcoatl looks out from within a serpent that is covered in feathers; and the sun god in Egypt has the symbol of the sun atop his head and holds out the wings of a feathered serpent. (From left to right-1st century AD Roman white marble relief from the Estense Museum in Modena, Italy; photo of Quetzalcoatl by Katherine Komaroff, Sky Gods: The Sun and Moon in Art and Myth, 1974; Egyptian illustration of the 11th hour from a tomb in the Valley of the Kings photo copyright wiki user Hajor, 2002) The serpent is a symbol of the earthly Mother, as it is an animal that is at all times in contact with the earth with its entire body. The feathers are those of an eagle, which is a symbol of the heavenly Father, as the eagle is an animal that flies and lives above all others and is thus associated with higher realms. The Son is the miraculous reconciliatory being that is both personal and cosmic, a force that acts to unite and integrate the earthly human with divinity, joining the serpent with the feathers, and thus why the Son has been referred to as the light and saviour of the world in so many different cultures.
Jesus said, "If the flesh came into being because of spirit, it is a wonder. But if spirit came into being because of the body, it is a wonder of wonders.
~ The Gospel of Thomas
Creation in Reverse
Enlightenment is the process of creation in reverse, as it is the return of the individual to the divine source. In creation myths a divine androgynous being emerges from the great unmanifest and unknowable
source. This being divides into male and female in order to create and gives birth to a son, and the rest of creation.
To follow this process in reverse the Son must be born within (symbolized at the winter solstice), then the Son returns to and fuses with the Mother (symbolized at the spring equinox, and as the Son being swallowed by the serpent), then the Son-Mother returns to and fuses with the Father (symbolized at the summer solstice, and as the serpent being swallowed by an eagle). The feathered serpent the three forces of creation, as Mother, Father, and Son a unified self-realized androgynous being, which is now whole, then returns on the wings of spirit from earth to the spiritual realm, the divine source of creation called the Absolute.
The symbol of the Absolute consists of three rings. The outer ring is reached when someone merges with the force of the Son, the second inner ring when they merge with the Mother, the third most inner ring when they merge with the Father. From there a person s consciousness has become whole again and they can enter the unmanifest source of creation.
The three rings of the Absolute were depicted in this illustration by Gustave Dore, which depicts the vision Dante describes of the supreme creator of the universe he sees at the end of his journey through hell, purgatory, and heaven.
In that abyss of radiance, clear and lofty, seemed, methought, three orbs of triple hue, clipt in one bound: And, from another, one reflected seemed, as rainbow is from rainbow: and the third seemed fire, breathed equally from both.
~ Dante, The Divine Comedy, paradiso canto 33
Three concentric rings were discovered in the cosmic microwave background, believed to be the microwave glow, present everywhere all at once, left over from the creation of the universe. Scientists believe the circular features indicate that the cosmos itself circles through epochs of endings and beginnings (study done by Penrose and Gurzadyan).
In the ancient Vedic texts of India, the mantra Om is said to represent the Absolute (called Brahman).
When a recording of this ancient Sanskrit mantra (which was made inside the chamber of the Great Pyramid of Egypt) was played using a cymascope (by John Stuart Reid and Erik Larson) it created the three ring symbol of the Absolute (see: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yw13EAX3cZk or do a search for Cymatic imagery of the Om chant ). This field of study is called Cymatics, which demonstrates the visual effects of sound upon matter and the geometric shapes and patterns it creates.
At the winter solstice, the divine Son is born within a spiritually prepared person. At the spring equinox, this Son dies, becomes one with the Great Mother of the universe, and resurrects. At the summer solstice, the Mother and Son ascend to the Father, so that the forces of Son, Mother, and Father become one.
Ascension
Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.
~ John 20:17, The Bible
Ascension is a process that occurs in the process of awakening it is symbolized by the summer solstice and is found in the life of Jesus. Jesus ascension occurs some time after he resurrects at the spring equinox. In the quote above, Jesus appears first to Mary Magdalene after he resurrects but tells her he has not yet ascended, as at this stage he has become one with the great Mother but not yet with the Father.
References to Jesus ascension in the Bible are extremely brief and vague. Some of these references, which are often only one line, were actually added to the Gospels later, so in looking for more extensive and perhaps more authentic references to the ascension, we have to look elsewhere.
There were many highly spiritual works that were excluded from the Bible and which contain secret and advanced teachings Jesus gave directly to the disciples. Many of these texts have only resurfaced in the last century or so after remaining hidden or lost for over a thousand years.
In one text called Pistis Sophia, Jesus narrates the story of the soul s journey through many perils in the world of matter until its final return to the Great Spirit from which it came. At the end of its journey to awakening, he describes its final ascension into the Ineffable the divine source.
And the soul which receiveth the mystery of the Ineffable, will soar into the height, being a great light-stream& and it will not give answers in any region, nor giveth it any apologies, nor giveth it any tokens; neither will any power of the rulers nor any power of the emanations of the Light be able to come nigh that soul. But all the regions of the rulers and all the regions of the emanations of the Light,--every one singeth unto it praises in their regions, in fear of the light of the stream which envelopeth that soul, until it passeth through them all, and goeth to the region of the inheritance of the mystery which it hath received,--that is to the mystery of the One and Only, the Ineffable, --and until it becometh one with its Limbs. Amn, I say unto you: It will be in all the regions in the time a man shooteth an arrow.
~ Jesus in the Pistis Sophia
This ascension is not an actual physical beam up into the sky, but the final fusion of the soul with the great creative spirit of the cosmos called the Father and happens within an individual.
All the dimensions of life are here and now. However, the average person is unable to perceive this and doesn t have the spiritual parts such as the Son, Mother, and Father within their consciousness. These higher aspects of consciousness exist in higher spiritual realms and give this higher perception, while the
average person has just a baseline consciousness and is unable to perceive much more than its simpler emanations allow.
Moreover, basic consciousness is sixth dimensional only (the place where most go in near-death experiences) and contains only the spiritual emanations of its plane, whereas the higher aspects of someone's Being are able to give the spiritual emanations from these higher planes. It is only once the consciousness of someone reunites with the higher spiritual parts of their Being in the process of enlightenment that they then contain the spiritual emanations of that higher part and plane permanently
this gives a much greater perception of multi-dimensional reality in the here and now, and the capacity to feel higher states such as peace and love far more than anyone who has not reunited with these parts is able to.
This is not something imaginary, and only comes to an individual who is able to pass through many tests and trials set in their life by divine beings.
Baseline consciousness is most easily buried by thought and emotion and these keep it locked into matter. Therefore, most people are unable to see anything more than physical form. But when a person s soul fuses with the great unknowable source of creation, their consciousness and the world is completely transformed.
This transformation is symbolized by the ascension of the solar Son, but actually occurs in the multi-dimensional psyche of an individual so that outwardly the person appears the same, but in consciousness they are completely transformed and therefore how they feel and what they see is transformed also, wherever they are.
This is the meaning behind many of the sayings of Jesus.
His disciples said to him, When will the kingdom come?
[Jesus] It will not come by watching for it. It will not be said, Look, here! or
Look, there! Rather, the Father's kingdom is spread out upon the earth, and people don't see it.
~ The Gospel of Thomas, The Nag Hammadi Library
He who will receive that light will not be seen, nor can he be detained. And none shall be able to torment a person like this, even while he dwells in the world. And again when he leaves the world, he has already received the truth in the images. The world has become the Aeon (eternal realm), for the Aeon is fullness for him.
~ The Gospel of Phillip, The Nag Hammadi Library
Jesus said, If your leaders say to you, Look, the (Father's) kingdom is in the sky,
then the birds of the sky will precede you. If they say to you, It is in the sea, then the fish will precede you. Rather, the (Father's) kingdom is within you and it is outside you. When you know yourselves, then you will be known, and you will understand that you are children of the living Father. But if you do not know yourselves, then you live in poverty, and you are the poverty.
~ The Gospel of Thomas, The Nag Hammadi Library
Jesus further explains that someone who fuses with the Ineffable is of an unimaginable spiritual stature, and yet is a man in the world.
Now, therefore, amn, I say unto you: Every man who will receive that mystery of the Ineffable and accomplish it in all its types and all its figures,--he is a man in the world, but he towereth above all angels and will tower still more above them all&
He is a man in the world, but he will rule with me in my kingdom.
He is a man in the world, but he is king in the Light.
He is a man in the world, but he is not one of the world.
And amn, I say unto you: That man is I and I am that man.
~ Jesus in the Pistis Sophia
The Return to the Source of Creation
An artist s rendition of the actual alignment of the summer solstice sun setting between the two Great Pyramids of Egypt, crowning the Sphinx in the foreground.
This fusion of the soul with the great Ineffable source of creation that Jesus describes can be found symbolized at the Great Pyramids of Egypt at the summer solstice.
Egyptian painting of the first sunrise at the dawning of creation from the primeval mound that arose from out of the waters. At the top is the "horizon" hieroglyph with the sun appearing between two mounds, looking like the setting summer solstice sun at the Great Pyramids.
On the summer solstice, the sun sets between the second largest of the pyramids and the Great Pyramid. As it does, it creates the Egyptian hieroglyph for the first act of creation the two pyramids act as the mounds either side of the sun as it rose for the first time. However, in this case the sun is setting not rising, indicating that this is a process of creation, but in reverse. Instead it depicts the sun going back to the source of creation.
In the esoteric Christian text, the Pistis Sophia, Jesus teaches his disciples that there are twenty-four mysteries, and that the first mystery, is also the last mystery that is, from where all came, is also where all returns, just as the sun returns to its point of origin each day and year.
And Jesus said to his disciples: I am come forth out of that First Mystery, which is the last mystery, that is the four-and-twentieth mystery. And his disciples have not known nor understood that anything existeth within that mystery; but they thought of that mystery, that it is the head of the universe and the head of all existence; and they thought it is the completion of all completions&
~ Pistis Sophia
This completion of all completions is not just of all that exists, but also of the spiritual process of the awakening of consciousness.
The Marriage of Heaven and Earth, and the Tree of Life
A maypole in Germany with the ring pierced by the pole, symbol of the united masculine and feminine forces, of heaven united with earth (photo copyright Matthias Süßen, 2010).
Summer solstice celebrations in Europe today still echo some of the ancient midsummer celebrations of the Druids. At the summer solstice the ancient Druids are said to have celebrated the marriage of heaven and earth, and many actual marriages were conducted at this time.
The pagan maypole still used in dances at midsummer was a symbol of the marriage between heaven and earth. It is symbolic of the Tree of Life, World Tree, and Axis Mundi found in sacred teachings throughout the world with its roots in the earth and branches in the heavens, forming a connection between these two realms. Through the unification of these two forces within, spiritual forces from higher realms can descend to lower ones and be disseminated to all. Likewise the lower earth matter of a human, through the great breath, is transformed and ascends to the heavens as the feathered serpent. The symbol of
Osiris as the djed pillar, with the feathers of the heavenly Father and serpent of the earthly Mother crowning his head, united through the Son/sun, is also a symbol of the Axis Mundi in which the trinity of creation is made one.
And just as the roots of the tree
Sink into the earth and are nourished,
And the branches of the tree
Raise their arms to heaven,
So is man like the trunk of the tree,
With his roots deep
In the breast of his Earthly Mother,
And his soul ascending
To the bright stars of his Heavenly Father.
And the roots of the tree
Are the Angels of the Earthly Mother,
And the branches of the tree
Are the Angels of the Heavenly Father.
And this is the sacred Tree of Life
Which stands in the Sea of Eternity.
~ The Essene Gospel of Peace, book one
The marriage between heaven and earth is a symbolic and spiritual one that represents the earthly soul (which is feminine in nature) and Mother, uniting with the heavenly spirit, the Father the fusion of the individual soul with the great spirit of the universe.
Wise men of old gave the soul a feminine name. Indeed she is female in her nature as well. She even has her womb. As long as she was alone with the father, she was virgin
and in form androgynous. But when she fell down into a body and came to this life, then she fell into the hands of many robbers. And the wanton creatures passed her from one to another and [...] her. Some made use of her by force, while others did so by seducing her with a gift. In short, they defiled her, and she [...] her virginity.
~ The Exegesis on the Soul
Ancient esoteric Christian texts, such as The Exegesis on the Soul and Pistis Sophia, tell the incredible story of the soul its fall into matter, perilous trials against darkness, and ultimate goal to ascend to heaven.
The quote above states that we were originally androgynous a state we lost as we came into creation as our consciousness split into various parts that stayed above in the different dimensions until we came down to inhabit a physical body. The soul then became defiled by the various ego states that were created, such as lust, greed, anger, hatred, violence, envy, etc., which are referred to as robbers because they steal the light and powers of the soul/consciousness. The summer solstice signifies the regaining of the soul s original powers and pure state, and its ascent to the place it originally descended from.
Now it is fitting that the soul regenerates herself and become again as she formerly was. The soul then moves of her own accord. And she received the divine nature from the father for her rejuvenation, so that she might be restored to the place where originally she had been. This is the resurrection that is from the dead. This is the ransom from captivity. This is the upward journey of ascent to heaven. This is the way of ascent to the father.
~ The Exegesis of the Soul
From heaven the father sent her her man, who is her brother, the firstborn. Then the
bridegroom came down to the bride. She gave up her former prostitution and cleansed herself of the pollutions of the adulterers, and she was renewed so as to be a bride.
She cleansed herself in the bridal chamber; she filled it with perfume; she sat in it waiting for the true bridegroom.
~ The Exegesis on the Soul
The purification the soul undergoes is an inner energetic one. At the summer solstice, the soul is completely purified and united with divinity, which is the reunification of the female aspect of the Being with the male aspect.
The first being that emerges from the Absolute source of creation at the dawn of time in creation stories around the world is androgynous, and divides into male and female in order to create just as the androgynous Adam divides into Adam and Eve, the supreme androgynous creator god Atum in Egypt creates Shu and Tefnut, and likewise in India Brahman creates through Purusha and Prakriti, etc.
In order to return to the source of creation, we must undergo this process in reverse. We emerged as an androgynous being, and we can only return as an androgynous being. This is not a physical or biological change, but an inner spiritual one references to which can be found in many ancient texts.
& it will lead your souls into the Light of lights, into the regions of Truth and Goodness, into the region of the Holy of all holies, into the region which there is neither female nor male, nor are there forms in that region, but a perpetual indescribable Light.
~ Jesus, the Pistis Sophia
Jesus said to them, When you make the two one, and when you make the inside like the outside and the outside like the inside, and the above like the below, and when you make the male and the female one and the same, so that the male not be male nor
the female female; and when you fashion eyes in the place of an eye, and a hand in place of a hand, and a foot in place of a foot, and a likeness in place of a likeness; then will you enter the kingdom.
~ Jesus, The Gospel of Thomas
The renunciation of all desires for love is symbolized by marriage (which is based on fidelity, chastity, purity, and love). Marriage and sex are actually extremely sacred, as they contain the powers and principles of divinity. In the following excerpt the soul (Pistis Sophia) is saved from the chaos by the Father, and their union is described as a kiss.
Grace and truth met together, and righteousness and peace kissed each other. Truth sprouted forth out of the earth, and righteousness looked down from heaven& 'Truth sprouted out of the earth,' because thou wert in the lower regions of the chaos.
'Righteousness' on the other hand which hath 'looked down from heaven,'--it is the power which hath come down from the height through the First Mystery and hath entered into Pistis Sophia.
~ Mary mother of Jesus in the Pistis Sophia
This marriage of heaven and earth is symbolic of the fusion of the human with the spirit, producing an individual, awakened spiritual being. It is the realization of the true inner potential within each human being. These beings have been referred to as angels, devas, avatars, celestial masters, and gods throughout different cultures.
Vestal Virgins and the Sacred Fire
Statue of a Vestal virgin of Rome (photo copyright wiki user Lalupa).
The soul as a bride of divinity was also celebrated in Rome at the summer solstice, and was based on ancient Druid traditions.
In Rome, the summer solstice was celebrated at the festival of Vestalia. It was the time of year when ordinary women were allowed to enter the sacred temple of the goddess Vesta, who was protector of the sacred flame, of chastity and marriage. The temple was always kept by Vestal Virgins who tended a sacred fire that continuously burned in a shrine and were always dressed as brides. No men were allowed to ever enter the temple of Vesta, not even the head of the Roman Empire.
This practice appears to be a continuation of a Druidic one as at Kildare in Ireland there was a sacred sanctuary of the Celtic goddess Brighid which nineteen virgin Druidess guarded, and which no man was
allowed to enter nor even look upon. The priestesses had the duty of attending the sacred fire of the Goddess Brighid that continuously burned, just as the Vestal Virgins did in Rome. This role was eventually assumed by nuns when the site became Christian, who themselves were called Brides of Christ. The original Druidic priestesses were called Inghean au dagha, and were believed to symbolize the virgin daughters of the flame. They were said to have sung the following song, in which the virginal soul is the bride that ascends to heaven by the light of the sun of the father:
"Bride, excellent woman, sudden flame, may the fiery, bright sun take us to the lasting kingdom."
Interestingly, there is also evidence of priestesses at the ancient Inca site of Machu Picchu who were called the Virgins of the Sun.
In Rome the vestal virgins had to commit to thirty years of virginity, which was a distortion of the esoteric meaning of the virginity of the soul. The female virgins of the temple are symbols of the soul that is undefiled and united with divinity, described in the texts of esoteric Christianity, such as The Exegesis of the Soul and Pistis Sophia. The sacred fire they tend is the eternal flame of the spirit within, and also the sexual fire, which must be protected from defilement from the egos, desires, all perversions and impurities. This is not a sexual abstinence, but an alchemical process which purifies the internal energies in sex itself called the bridal chamber in esoteric Christianity, Tantrism in the East, HeQi in Taoism of ancient China, and symbolized as the alchemical transformation of lead into gold in medieval times.
At the summer solstice, the soul regains its previously unadulterated, pure, and virginal state an inner state gained through the purification of sexual alchemy. The purity of the Vestal Virgins of Rome was taken extremely seriously as their adulteration was seen to affect the Empire. Symbolically, their fall was that of the soul from grace, into darkness, chaos, and impurity.
Holy Wells and Holy Water
The symbolic Roman and Druid virgins that tended the sacred fire in the temple of the goddess also kept sacred waters the Vestal Virgins of Rome carried sacred water from a holy spring for summer solstice ceremonial purposes which they did not allow to ever touch the ground lest it be defiled, and the Druid priestesses kept a holy well at their sanctuary which was said to have special healing properties. In pagan traditions, these holy waters are meant to be especially magical and powerful at the summer solstice. Both the Osireion temple in Egypt, and the ancient ruins of the Druid site on Tallaght Hill in Ireland, align to the summer solstice and incorporate water. Summer solstice ceremonies based on ancient traditions in South America are held at sacred springs, lakes, and waterfalls.
The significance of healing water on the summer solstice in Druid traditions can be traced back to ancient celebrations that took place on midsummer.
In the beginning of creation, the Druids believed that the sap of the cauldron of the Great Mother goddess Cariadwen/Cerridwen was fertilized by three drops of dew from the Word of the Father god Celu the dew containing the warmth of the sun. From the action of these masculine and feminine principles united by the warmth of the sun symbolized by the Son/Christ called Hu Gardarn, they believed everything came into being.
There is record that in Wales the druids may have celebrated the summer solstice using holy water from a holy well. This ancient British festival is called Gwyl, meaning something like dew place. In Lithuania where many pagan customs are still celebrated, midsummer is called Rasos, which means
Dew Holiday. On the morning of the summer solstice, young Lithuanian women still wash their faces in dew today. The dew is the symbolic pure emanations of the Father.
Following is a reference to an ancient Druid ceremony that was celebrated at midsummer the dew is sprinkled three times as there were three drops of dew that began creation:
And they with oaken wreaths appear:
Old Corynaenus compassed thrice the crew,
And dipped an olive branch in holy dew,
Which thrice he sprinkled round.
~ Virgil s Aeneis, B. VI.
Two Druids, one of which has an oaken wreath on his head like the Druid who conducts the summer solstice ceremony mentioned by Virgil.
The following excerpt from The Odes of Solomon, which was studied by the disciples of Jesus themselves, contains a reference to dew upon the face, as practiced by the ancient pagans. The imagery of summer is associated with the eternal realm of light, beauty, and fragrance the soul ascends to.
And I rejected the folly cast upon the earth, and stripped it off and cast it from me.
And the Lord renewed me with His garment, and possessed me by His light. And from above He gave me immortal rest, and I became like the land that blossoms and rejoices in its fruits. And the Lord is like the sun upon the face of the land. My eyes were enlightened, and my face received the dew; And my breath was refreshed by the pleasant fragrance of the Lord. And He took me to His Paradise, wherein is the wealth of the Lord's pleasure. I beheld blooming and fruit-bearing trees, And self-grown was their crown. Their branches were sprouting and their fruits were shining.
From an immortal land were their roots. And a river of gladness was irrigating them, And round about them in the land of eternal life.
~ The Odes of Solomon
Greenery and flowers are used in pagan celebrations of the summer solstice that have survived throughout Europe today, and are used in the Christian celebration of the Pentecost, which occurs at the summer solstice, to decorate churches. This is one of many examples of the Christian tradition incorporating pagan symbolism in its celebrations the greenery and flowers symbolize the realm of the spirit, as a place of eternal summer and light.
The Druids saw that flowers and their sweet perfume were not provided to supply nourishment to build up carnal bodies, but were provided by the tender eternal Author of the Universe to gratify the sense of the beautiful in human souls. They, therefore regarded flowers and hues of landscapes, as harbingers of a world of beauty, and eternal summer, beyond this life.
~ Morien O. Morgan, The Royal Winged Son of Stonehenge and Avebury
The Soul Crowned by the Spirit
Midsummer Crown (photo copyright Bengt Nyman, 2009).
Wreaths form a large part of midsummer celebrations in Europe which originated in ancient times. Women wear wreaths of flowers and men wear wreaths of Oak. Wreaths of flowers and greenery adorn the maypole, which is danced around on the summer solstice, and are also floated upon the water of lakes and streams.
Symbolic references to the wreath can be found in the ancient texts of esoteric Christianity, and at the Sphinx which is aligned to the summer solstice in Egypt.
The wreath is the eternal crown of the spirit, which creates the halo famously depicted in artwork throughout the world.
The sun at the Great Pyramids of Egypt, on the summer solstice, creates a halo of light around the head of the Sphinx as it sets on the day of most light in the year.
In the esoteric Christian text Pistis Sophia, Jesus sends down a light stream which forms are wreath around the head of the ascending Pistis Sophia the supernatural female being of the story, who
symbolizes the soul.
And moreover by commandment of myself, the First Mystery which looketh without, the light-stream which surrounded Pistis Sophia on all her sides, shone most exceedingly, and Pistis Sophia abode in the midst of the light, a great light being on her left and on her right, and on all her sides, forming a wreath round her head.
~ Jesus in the Pistis Sophia
In interpreting the above passage in Pistis Sophia, Mary the mother of Jesus refers to another ancient esoteric Christian text that was later brought to light called the Odes of Solomon quoting the following passage, which explains the meaning of the symbol of the wreath further.
The Lord is on my head like a crown, and I shall never be without Him. Plaited for me is the crown of truth, and it caused Your branches to blossom in me. For it is not like a parched crown that blossoms not; For You live upon my head, and have
blossomed upon me. Your fruits are full and complete; they are full of Your
salvation...
~ The Odes of Solomon
At the summer solstice, the soul is wreathed by the spirit. Some believe that the ancient site of Stonehenge, which receives the rays of the dawning sun on the summer solstice to its inner sanctuary, symbolizes the sun crowning the earth which again is symbolic of the soul crowned by the spirit.
The End of Darkness and of Lucifer
Seth is the god to the left and Horus to the right in this image, with the initiate in the center.
In ancient Britain the god of light was the Oak King, and the god of darkness was the Holly King. The Oak King reigned during the light half of the year, from the winter to summer solstice. The summer solstice was the height of his reign as the day of most light. The Holly King instead reigned from after the summer solstice to the height of winter, which is the time of most darkness in the year.
Similarly in ancient Egypt Horus was the god of the sun and light, while the god Seth was the personification of darkness. At the summer solstice Horus finally defeated Seth in battle, and was crowned King.
Horus and the Oak King are symbols of the Son/Christ, whilst Seth and the Holly King are symbols of Lucifer. Lucifer plays a role in the work of spiritual awakening, as he is the tempter and psychological trainer stirring our sexual passions and desires from within the subconscious, the dark part of our psyche, so that we can see, understand, and overcome them, and transform subconscious to consciousness, lust into love, and darkness into light. This is why esoterically he has been referred to as the light
bringer.
In the ancient text the Pistis Sophia, Jesus is described as ascending on the fifteenth day of the month of Tybi on a full moon. The number fifteen was assigned to Lucifer in ancient traditions of numerology.
The numbers one and five added equal six, which is the number of sexual desire. This reference is symbolic of the defeat of Lucifer, of all temptation and desire, and the transformation of the moon (which is a symbol of the subconscious) into total light and consciousness.
And it came to pass then, on the fifteenth day of the moon in the month Tybi, which is the day on which the moon is full, on that day then, when the sun had come forth in his going, that there came forth behind him a great light-power shining most exceedingly, and there was no measure to the light conjoined with it& Then Jesus ascended or soared into the height, shining most exceedingly in an immeasurable light. And the disciples gazed after him and none of them spake, until he had reached unto heaven; but they all kept in deep silence. This then came to pass on the fifteenth day of the moon, on the day on which it is full in the month Tybi.
~ Pistis Sophia
To be able to ascend to the Father, Lucifer and all his temptations must firstly be overcome. At the summer solstice, Lucifer is finally defeated by the initiate, just as Horus defeats Seth and the Oak King defeats the Holly King. Lucifer has fulfilled his role as the light-bringer as at the summer solstice the light is made complete. He is absorbed into the light of the spirit, and inner darkness is no more.
The summer solstice is also the stage in the process of enlightenment when the subconscious, the ego states of the initiate are finally defeated, which is the defeat of all the evil and darkness within a person.
In the following excerpt Jesus takes all the power out of the seven-headed monster, which is symbolic of the self-willed and selfish egos whose seven heads represent the seven sins.
And I led Pistis Sophia forth from the chaos, she treading under foot the serpent-faced emanation of Self-willed, and moreover treading under foot the seven faced-basilisk emanation, and treading under foot the lion- and dragon-faced power. I made Pistis Sophia continue to stand upon the seven-headed-basilisk emanation of Selfwilled; and it was more mighty than them all in its evil doings. And I, the First Mystery, stood by it and took all the powers in it, and made to perish its whole matter, so that no seed should arise from it from now on.
~ Jesus in the Pistis Sophia
It was said that at the summer solstice the Oak King withdrew to the realm of the circumpolar stars,
known to the Greeks as the Corona Borealis, to the Egyptians as ik-hem-sek, "not-knowing-destruction,"
and to the Celts as Caer Arianrhod. This region of the stars never disappears below the horizon, not even at the time of midwinter. This symbolizes the ascent of the initiate into the eternal realms of divine light.
The Eternal Cycle
In the path of the spiritual sun, the sun at the summer solstice represents the ascension, enlightenment, and the return to oneness the divine source. It is the culmination of the individual's journey to enlightenment that has been represented in the solstices and equinoxes of the year.
The celebration of the summer solstice is the celebration not only of the life giving power of the physical sun, but is the celebration of the complete awakening of the spiritual Son, symbolized by the physical sun. After the end of the summer solstice, the cycle of the year in its symbolic depiction of the work to awakening begins again, as the sun starts to descend in its annual journey.
Around three days after the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere, the birth of John the Baptist is celebrated as St John s Day. This is no coincidence, as following the summer solstice is the birth of the dark half of the year, which is a return to the beginning of the descent of consciousness into matter.
A depiction of the Norse Tree of Life as described in the Icelandic Prose Edda.
And so completes the cycle of the sun in its journey each year; and as it completes it begins again, repeatedly teaching its sacred wisdom through creation to the individual sparks of consciousness that each contain creation s wondrous potential that, like the seed that lies dormant beneath the earth at autumn, if it dies, can have the life of the spirit germinate within and grow to magnificent full bloom at summer.
See, oh Sons of Light, the branches of the Tree of Life reaching toward the kingdom of the Heavenly Father. And see the roots of the Tree of Life descending into the bosom of the Earthly Mother. And the Son of Man is raised to an eternal height and walks in the wonders of the plain; for only the Son of Man carries in his body the roots of the Tree of Life; the same roots that suckle from the bosom of the Earthly Mother; and only the Son of Man carries in his spirit the branches of the Tree of Life; the same branches that reach to the sky, even so to the kingdom of the Heavenly Father.
~ Jesus in The Essene Gospel of Peace, book four
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Ancient Sacred Sites Aligned to the Summer Solstice
Some of the most famous ancient megalithic sites in the world align to the summer solstice in numerous different cultures: Egyptian, Pagan, Mayan, Essene, Buddhist, Native American, and Easter Islander.
Below are some examples there are many others that have not been included, and may be many more that have not yet been discovered.
The Great Pyramids ~ Egypt
An artist s rendition of the actual alignment of the summer solstice sun setting between the two Great Pyramids of Egypt, crowning the Sphinx in the foreground.
At the Great Pyramids of Egypt, when standing looking back at the front of the Sphinx, the sun on the
summer solstice sets precisely between the two largest of the Great Pyramids. The sun's descent between the two pyramids seems to enact the moment of creation where the sun emerged from between two mounds, but in reverse, perhaps signifying the return of the divine Son/sun to the source of creation.
The Osireion ~ Egypt
The temple of Osireion at Abydos in Egypt. It shares many architectural similarities with the Valley Temple beside the Sphinx, as well as a connection to the deity Anubis as head of the underworld in alignment with the sun and constellation of Leo (photo copyright wiki user RsAzevedo, 2008).
There is an incredibly mysterious temple at the ancient site of Abydos in Egypt. For thousands of years Abydos was believed to be the final resting place of the Egyptian god Osiris. Then in AD 1902 the Osireion temple was unearthed, which many believe could have been the tomb of Osiris.
The Osireion shares incredible similarities with the Valley Temple that lies next to the Sphinx. Both the Valley Temple and Osireion are made out of huge unadorned granite blocks, which also look very similar to Stonehenge, and share the same construction methods and a number of mathematical
characteristics (for example, both feature the number seventeen). The Valley Temple was built at the same time as the Sphinx, and its similarities with the Osireion seem to indicate that the Osireion may too have been built by the builders of the Sphinx.
The Osireion is dated to between 6,000 3,100 BC, although it is possibly much older. It had been unearthed at least once before when the Pharaoh Seti I uncovered it during the construction of his temple in around 1,280 BC.
The Valley Temple located beside the Great Sphinx of Egypt. It shares remarkable similarities in building style with the Osireion, another ancient temple. Both are made out of huge unadorned granite blocks (photo copyright Daniel Mayer, 2008).
Like the Great Pyramids and Sphinx, the Osireion has a summer solstice sunset alignment. On the summer solstice, the light of the setting sun shines through a nearby gap in the Libyan Hills, which
intersects the Osireion temple.
The temple was constructed near a natural spring, which was used to feed a pool of water inside the temple that forms a moat around its central part. Some believe this was intended to symbolize the mound that rose from the primeval waters at the beginning of creation in ancient Egyptian texts, while others draw similarities to the sacred pagan healing well springs of the ancient Britons.
Other mysterious aspects of the site include a flower of life symbol found inscribed on some of the pillars of the temple, believed to have been left there by Greeks possibly around 300 BC. Ancient hieroglyphs of what appear to be hovercraft, and various flying machines like helicopters, can be found in the temple of Seti I next door.
The Essene Monastery ~ Qumran, Egypt
The ruins of the Essene community at Qumran (photo copyright wiki user MotherForker, 2011).
Said to be the inheritors of the ancient initiatory knowledge of the esoteric schools of Egypt, the Essenes were a mystical Jewish group which followed a solar calendar (rather than the traditional Jewish lunar calendar) and like the sites of ancient Egypt, had a sacred place aligned to the summer solstice sunset.
The Essene community is believed to have existed between around 200 BC to the first century AD and lived together in various places in Palestine, Syria, and Egypt. They are the authors of the Dead Sea Scrolls a set of ancient mystical texts discovered in Qumran in Egypt in 1947 in the caves nearby one of their settlements.
The largest room of their stone communal building at Qumran is aligned so that the rays of the setting sun on the summer solstice illuminate the eastern wall where there are two altars. Two ancient historians had written that the Essenes worshiped the sun (just as the Egyptians did), and the discovery of this alignment along with their texts now confirms this.
Additionally, a limestone sundial was discovered there, designed to measure the sun throughout the year rather than the day, and which could measure the solstices and equinoxes.
They appear to have been a solar religion, as many of the most ancient religions were each morning they would begin their day with a prayer to the sun and they called themselves the Children of Light. It is believed that Jesus spent time with the Essenes who had been awaiting the arrival of a messiah, and the life of Jesus also follows the solar year (e.g. Jesus was born at the winter solstice, John the Baptist killed at the autumn equinox, Jesus crucified at the spring equinox).
Stonehenge ~ England
The summer solstice sunrise aligns with the avenue off the circle around Stonehenge. At sunrise the sun shines down the avenue, between the two heel stones, into the center of the stone circle.
The giant megalithic stone circle of Stonehenge aligns most prominently to the summer solstice with alignments at sunrise, midday, and sunset.
At sunrise on the summer solstice, the sun rose between two Heel Stones outside Stonehenge, and penetrated into its center to the altar stone.
A giant ancient avenue leading from Stonehenge to the nearby River Avon also aligns to the summer solstice sunrise. The ancient stone circle called Bluehenge lies where this avenue and the river meet.
At midday on the summer solstice, the sun shines directly overhead Stonehenge into its center.
Next to Stonehenge there is a large area called the Stonehenge Cursus which is an area of earthen ditches and banks around 3 km long and 100-150 meters wide. Within this area are two huge pits around 16 feet across and 3 feet deep that, when viewed from the Heel Stone just outside Stonehenge, align to the summer solstice sunrise and sunset.
Yet another ancient site called Durrington Walls lies two miles northeast of Stonehenge. It contains a henge called the Southern Circle consisting of six concentric circles that would have been made out of
large timber posts. The circle is aligned to the winter solstice sunrise, but like Stonehenge has a paved avenue leading to the River Avon and a post which acted as the Heel Stone aligned to the summer solstice sunset rather than sunrise.
It is possible that Stonehenge was part of a sacred landscape in which a number of sites were used ceremoniously during various celestial occasions, but it appears, particularly the summer solstice.
Nabta Playa ~ Egypt
A replica of the stone circle at Nabta Playa from the Aswan Nubia museum (photo copyright wiki user Raymbetz, 2009).
Nabta Playa is the name of a location in the Egyptian desert where there is an ancient stone circle dated to around 4,800 BC that acts as astronomical calendar, much like Stonehenge. A number of other large stone megaliths are located around the circle and also align to the stars. Together it is claimed they have some astonishing stellar, solar, and even galactic alignments, including to the summer solstice marking not only the positions of the stars but even the distance of these stars from Earth!
The stones align to the rising sun on the summer solstice, as well as the star Sirius (the brightest star in the night sky), Dubhe (the brightest star in Ursa Major), and stars in the belt of the constellation Orion.
Interestingly, the summer solstice, Sirius, and Orion were also used in the design of the Great Pyramids
and Sphinx these and other similarities have led many to theorize that the builders of the site at Nabta Playa and the site of the Great Pyramids at Giza (around 800 kilometers away) are connected.
Additionally, the site was built in the Tropic of Cancer, which many believe was done on purpose so that the vertical stones at the site marked the sun's zenith passage at the summer solstice (which occurs three weeks before and after it) so that they cast no shadow at all during this time.
The astrophysicist Thomas G. Brophy discovered that the stones marked the helical rising (which is the conjunction of a star or constellation with the sun as it rises or sets) of a number of stars in the constellation of Orion on the spring equinox, the star Vega on the autumn equinox, and the rising of the galactic center on the spring equinox at around 17,700 BC.
Most incredibly of all however, Brophy discovered that the distance between the megaliths that marked these helical risings matched the distance of the stars they marked from Earth on a scale of roughly 1 meter to 0.8 light years within the margin of error found in calculating astronomical distances today.
Tallaght Hill of the Fair Gods ~ Mount Seskin, Ireland
On Mount Seskin, the tallest of the Tallaght Hills (outside of the town of Tallaght) there are a number of ancient stone ruins including standing stones and passage cairns. The summer solstice sun rises in the distance, right beside the Lambay Volcano and reflects off a pool of water on the hill called Lin Oir, meaning golden pond.
See pictures here: http://www.druidschool.com/site/1030100/page/882207.
Externsteine ~ Germany
The temple atop of Externsteine near Horn-Bad Meinberg, Germany. The hole in the shrine aligns to the summer solstice sunrise (photo copyright wiki user R. Engelhardt, 2007).
The Externsteine rocks are a chain of naturally occurring sandstone spires dating from about 70 million years ago. They were a sacred place of pilgrimage in prehistoric, Celtic, and early Saxon times and a site of pagan ritual until the eighth century AD, when Charles the Great cut down the sacred Irmensul tree, the German tree of life. At the top of the tallest spire is a mysterious prehistoric temple; no one knows for certain who built it. It is centered around a round hole above an altar carved into a small stone shrine.
This hole looks out at the surrounding landscape and aligns to the moon at its northern extreme and the sun at sunrise on the summer solstice.
Ajanta Caves ~ India
The cave at Ajanta called number twenty-six, which aligns to the summer solstice sunrise. As the sun rises, a beam of light penetrates this cave and illuminates the stupa and the statue of Buddha within (photo copyright wiki user dola.das85, 2011).
The Ajanta Caves are an extraordinary group of around thirty man-made caves cut into the side of a sheer cliff face. The cliff is naturally U-shaped and was hidden in a remote part of the jungle. The caves are believed to have been built by Buddhist monks by carving into the cliff face what they created were elaborate shrines and temples, all cut into one single giant rock.
Work is believed to have begun on the caves in around 200 BC and ended around AD 480 650. The caves contained sculptures and artwork centered around the life of Buddha.
Two of the caves align to celestial events.
Cave twenty-six aligns to the summer solstice sunrise. It contains a statue of Buddha seated within a
stupa, which is illuminated by the rays of the rising sun on the summer solstice.
Cave nineteen aligns to the winter solstice sunrise. It contains a statue of Buddha standing within a stupa, which is also illuminated by the rays of the rising sun on the winter solstice.
A stupa is a symbolic monument which it is said Buddha uses to ascend and descend. The stupas for the winter and summer solstice at the Ajanta Caves differ in their design, perhaps for a symbolic reason.
The winter solstice is a time when the force known as the Christ descends into a spiritually prepared person.
The summer solstice is a time of ascent. In the cave aligned to the summer solstice Buddha is seated with his feet on a pedestal. Perhaps this was symbolic of him no longer being on the earth as ancient Egypt gods were sometimes portrayed upon pedestals to show their heavenly status.
The creator god Amun being worshipped, seated with his feet raised above the level of the ground similar to the statue of Buddha at Ajanta.
Serpent Mound ~ Ohio, United States
The serpent mound in Ohio, whose head aligns with the summer solstice sunset. (photo copyright Timothy A. Price and Nicole I., 2002)
The serpent mound is a giant earth work in the shape of a serpent made by an ancient peoples who once lived in the United States. The head of the serpent faces the summer solstice sunset.
The mound is around 1,370 feet (420 meters) long. The serpent holds an oval in its mouth, has seven undulating coils along its body, and the tip of its tail is coiled three times. Its coils point to the winter solstice and equinox sunrises. It is believed there was an altar inside the oval at the head, in which ceremonies could have been conducted while watching the summer solstice sunset.
Many believe using carbon dating and studying artifacts surrounding the site that it was built by the Native American Adena culture, who were active between 1000 BC to AD 1, and who commonly built mounds and used sacred circles, and was later refurbished by subsequent Native American cultures.
A drawing published in 1883 of the Loch Nell serpent mound in Scotland. The altar in the stone circle at the head of the serpent is in the foreground, and the three mountain peaks in the background. The design of this particular serpent mound shares a number of similarities with the one in the United States.
However, there exists another very similar site in a very different part of the world Scotland. At a place called Loch Nell there is an ancient serpent mound, around 300 feet long, and which used to have a circle of stones which contained an altar at its head. It too faced west, although not to the summer solstice sunset, but so that looking back east across its body it had a special view of three mountain peaks.
Someone who viewed the site in the mid nineteenth century before much of it was damaged and dismantled wrote:
The mound was built in such a manner that the worshipper standing at the altar would naturally look eastward, directly along the whole length of the Great Reptile, and across the dark lake, to the triple peaks of Ben Cruachan. This position must have been carefully selected, as from no other point are the three peaks visible.
There are other serpent mounds in Scotland and Ireland. At least one dated to around 2000 BC used
fire burnt stones, which were also apparently used in the building of the serpent mound in Ohio. The oval at the heads of these serpents may have represented the sun, thus forming the same symbol of a serpent with a sun disk on its head found throughout Egypt.
Could Ohio s serpent mound be part of a lineage of people and knowledge that ran from Egypt, through ancient Britain and Europe, and is now barely traceable in North America?
Chaco Canyon ~ New Mexico, United States
The giant kiva in Chaco Canyon whose window let in the light of the summer solstice sunrise. Kivas were sacred circular temples that had thatched ceilings (photo copyright wiki user HJPD, 1998).
Located near the ruins of an ancient city of the Native American Pueblo peoples is the famous Sun Dagger. Found high up on the top of what is called the Fajada Butte, a giant volcanic outcrop, is a stone carving in a spiral. Stone slabs especially arranged around it direct the sunlight so that on the summer solstice, a dagger of sunlight pierces the center of the spiral. Daggers of sunlight over different parts of the spiral also mark the winter solstice and the equinoxes.
Down below the Casa Rinconada, which is one of the five great kivas (temple buildings) of the Chaco Canyon city, aligns to the summer solstice sunrise. As the sun rises, a beam of light shines through a lone window and moves across the room until it illuminates one of the five niches on the western wall.
Ahu Tongariki ~ Easter Island
These fifteen maoi statues, which includes the heaviest on Easter Island ever erected, stand facing the summer solstice sunset (photo copyright wiki user Honey Hooper, 2006).
The Ahu Tongariki is the largest ahu (or stone platform) on Easter Island. On its stone platform stand fifteen maoi (giant stone statues). These fifteen statues face the summer solstice sunset, watching it disappear over the ocean. One of the fifteen statues is the heaviest ever erected on the island, weighing 86
tons.
The Temple of the Descending God at Tulum ~ Yucatán, Mexico
The ancient Mayan city of Tulum is dedicated to the Mayan "descending god" and consists of a number of sacred and ceremonial buildings. The ruins of this ancient city stand on a bluff overlooking the ocean. The original name of this site was "Zama" which means "City of Dawn" because it faces the sunrise.
The Temple of the Descending God at the site of Tulum. According to some accounts, it aligns to the rising sun on the summer solstice.
The information about the alignments of this site are inconsistent, but a number of accounts state that the sun at sunrise on the summer solstice shines through a tiny opening on the back wall of the Temple of the Descending God to create the effect of a beam of light shining from out of the doorway of the temple.
You can see pictures of it here.
This temple was built over an even older structure that was filled in to make the foundation of the temple artifacts have been found dated to the first century AD although many of the buildings were erected around AD 1200.
The descending god is portrayed throughout the site descending from heaven, with his legs in the air and his head crowned. He is believed by some to be a representation of the Mayan god Kukulcán and Aztec god Quezalcoatl the feathered serpent, and is associated with the planet Venus, the "Morning
Star," just as the feathered serpent god and Jesus was.
I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star.
~ Jesus, Revelation 22:16
The descending god carved above the doorway of The Temple of the Descending God (photo copyright wiki user El Comandante, 2009).
Throughout the site there are frescoes that depict scenes of feathered serpents, the act of creation, and are particularly focused on death and rebirth. "The round platform of the Temple of the Wind may also symbolize birth, as an aspect of Venus as the Morning Star, reborn after passage through the Underworld."
(source) The story of Jesus' death, descent to hell, and resurrection are well known, and bear a striking similarity with these sacred Mayan teachings.
The parallels between the descending god and the story of Christ have led many to believe that Jesus actually visited South America after his resurrection. Quetzalcoatl for example, is depicted as a white man with a beard.
The Pyramid of the Magician at Uxmal ~ Yucatán, Mexico
The Pyramid of the Magician at the Mayan city of Uxmal in Mexico. Its western staircase faces the summer solstice sunset (photo copyright 2007 wiki user tato grass).
Uxmal is a Mayan city that dates to between AD 600 1000. The city s tallest structure is called The Pyramid of the Magician. The pyramid s western staircase faces the setting sun on the summer solstice.
Building is believed to have first begun on this pyramid around AD 600. This first pyramid temple was successively built upon four times, meaning that the pyramid is now made of five layered temples in total. This was a common Mayan building practice, thought to capture and amplify the power of the underlying structure.
When the original temple was excavated it was found with a door lintel decorated with the face of the rain god Chaac, however it is not known whether this was added later.
Unfortunately human sacrifice and ritual bloodletting was practiced here, as it was in other Mayan cities. Perhaps the original culture did not practice these rites, but at this stage it is not possible to tell.
The Lost World Pyramid at Tikal ~ Guatemala
The Lost World Pyramid at Tikal. It started as a small platform before 700 BC that faced three structures aligned to the solstices and equinoxes (photo copyright Dennis Jarvis, 2007).
At the ancient Mayan city called Tikal, located in the dense jungles of Guatemala, there is evidence for the original spiritual and cosmic knowledge of the Mayans. The oldest part of Tikal is called the Lost World and consists of thirty-eight structures. They are believed to have been set aside entirely for the observance of the cosmos, and are perhaps the oldest Mayan structures used for that purpose.
The main structure of the Lost World is a great pyramid, which was built in five successive layers over hundreds of years, just like the Mayan Pyramid of the Magician above. It began as a platform dating back to before 700 BC the most ancient of any at Tikal. The platform faced east, looking over three other structures that aligned with the winter solstice, equinoxes, and summer solstice sunrise.
A similar grouping of structures, in which a pyramid is used as a viewing platform to see the sunrise on the winter solstice, equinoxes, and summer solstice over three temples, was also found in Guatemala at Uaxactun. The ancient Mayan name for this site however was Siaan K'aan which means "Born in Heaven." Perhaps this could indicate that the Mayan Pyramid of the Magician above also started as a
spiritual astronomical observatory, which was successively built on, and which degenerated into horrendous acts of sacrifice, as also happened at Tikal and other Mayan cities.
Wurdi Youang Stone Arrangement ~ Victoria, Australia
At Mount Rothwell in Australia, it is believed that aboriginals built a stone ovoid shaped arrangement around 50 meters in diameter. It aligns to the solstice and equinox sunsets, including the summer solstice sunset. It is unable to be dated, and could have been built anywhere between twenty-five thousand years ago right up to AD 1835.
To see images of the site, visit: http://aboriginalastronomy.blogspot.com.au/2011/03/wurdi-youang-
aboriginal-stone.html.
PART II
CEREMONIES AND RITUALS FOR CELEBRATING
THE SOLSTICE AND EQUINOX
CHAPTER TWELVE
A Guide to Celebrating the Solstice and Equinox
Ancient people of nearly every race and culture have celebrated the solstice and equinox as evident in hundreds if not thousands of ancient sites, myths, and texts, and the most famous spiritual figures of the world such as Jesus, Osiris, Hu Gadarn, Mithras, Dionysus, Hun Hunaphu, Quetzalcoatl, etc., experienced major events in their life stories at these times. While some of these traditions were simple and based on an appreciation of the natural world, many celebrated the profound and universal spiritual significance of these special times year.
Many ancient people knew that the natural world and its cycles contain the principles of creation, and that these principles are spiritual in their nature. That is why some of the world s most famous and universal religious symbols can actually be found in the natural world, such as the yin and yang, the
swastika, cross, spiral, etc., and why the study of science and mathematics ultimately comes upon a fabric of life that is intelligent in its design.
The maxim of wisdom, as above, so below indicates how cosmic and natural phenomena are intimately connected to the human being and journey of consciousness. We are undeniably part of the universe, and so too therefore is the process of awakening. The sun (and stars) is the source of light and life in our universe, just as the spirit is the source of light and life within us. Spiritual figures and texts placed so much emphasis on the journey of the sun, as the path of the sun is symbolic of the path of consciousness/spirit in its journey to awakening, and the solstice and equinox are this journey's major stages.
Why Celebrate the Solstice and Equinox?
Painting of the Pythagoreans (an ancient esoteric school in Greece) celebrating the rising sun.
Some ancient peoples and mystics throughout history were in touch with a different way of gaining knowledge than most are familiar with. This way of learning is timeless, and is gained through individual
practice, experience, and observation of the natural world, rather than just reading.
Today, although we as a human race have become distant from and even hostile toward our environment, the principles of creation remain eternal. They are there within and all around us for anyone who opens their eyes to see.
These principles have, throughout history, been extremely relevant to every human being, no matter what race, sex, religion, or nationality, and are in fact what unites us. This is why so many ancient peoples from all over the world and across time celebrated these special times of the year.
Although the solstice and equinox are cosmic events, they are also very personal ones. They communicate not only cosmic principles, but inner ones too, as the inner and outer world are connected.
Each individual can have their own reasons for celebrating the solstice and equinox, but these celebrations give everyone participating an opportunity to experience spiritual principles directly. The spirit in life teaches through these celebrations an individual can learn something personal about their own journey of consciousness, and a group celebrating can learn and perceive something together. Some people who celebrated the ceremony for the summer solstice given here for the first time found afterward that they had all felt something powerfully spiritual and significant from it, and that they had been so moved by it that they would never be the same again.
Celebrating It According to Your Circumstances
Your circumstances will really determine how you ll be able to celebrate, but there is still lots of flexibility and room for creativity. It can be celebrated all the way from a detailed ritual to simply being present for the sunrise/sunset.
In a Group at a Dedicated Location
Winter solstice ceremony in California.
The ideal way to celebrate the solstice and equinox is out in the open air, where the sun is clearly visible, with a large group of people who are open to the spiritual side of the event. Chanting mantras becomes especially moving with lots of voices, and the energy of a focused gathering of people can be really uplifting. It would be great if every city had a place where people could go and celebrate together in a large group.
The ceremonies I ve created in this book are really tailored for a group who has their own dedicated sacred space where they can feel comfortable and relaxed in practicing the spirituality of their choice.
If you re unable to do it outside due to a lack of privacy or difficult weather conditions, a gathering of people could always practice in a room that lets the light of the sun in at the moment of sunrise or sunset on the solstice or equinox. There are many examples of ancient peoples celebrating in this way. For example, the Essenes had a monastery which had a room that let in the light of the sun on the summer solstice. The Pueblo Indians of North America created kivas (which were their temples) that were entirely enclosed except for a window that let in a shaft of light on the winter solstice.
While it s not within everyone s budget to build a room like this, there are some fairly simple ways of doing it. A cheap do-it-yourself tepee or cabin could be put on a site and its door aligned to the solstice or equinox. Then, only the door need be opened, or perhaps a cabin window could be aligned instead.
In a Group at a Public Location
If you only have venues open to you where people who are not involved in the celebration may be staring or even insulting, then you will probably want to simplify the ceremony to the point where you feel comfortable, and may omit special clothing and ceremonial items perhaps just chanting mantras together and doing readings.
Another idea could be to find ancient or sacred sites in your area and watch the sunrise or sunset together there. For example, there are ancient standing stones, mounds, mountains, springs, etc. across Europe that are hardly visited. North and South America are also full of sacred sites and places.
On Your Own
If you re celebrating on your own, you could find a nice private spot in your garden or patio to watch the sunrise and chant mantras, or even just sit in quietness, prayer, or reflection. You could even create a very simple outdoor sacred space with stones and candles.
Alternatively you could also celebrate indoors in a room that catches the sunlight. Make sure to create a sacred space to celebrate by incorporating the colors related to the ceremony, candles, aromas, and even music.
The Day and Days Surrounding the Event
In ancient times celebrations for the solstice and equinox did not only consist of a special ceremony at sunrise or sunset, but carried on throughout the days and nights surrounding it. Depending on the meaning of the occasion, the celebrations can be filled with spiritual dancing, music, singing, and bonfires, or times of prayer, quietness, and meditation.
It s especially nice to gather around a fire and sing spiritual songs and mantras. Fire itself is living and divine, and very much connected to the sun and its own fire, as well as to the fire of the spirit within.
This is why fire has always held a special place in religious rites and places throughout the world.
Work out a Calendar and Prepare in Advance
The solar year can be mapped out in advance. Websites such as this give the upcoming dates for the
solstices and equinoxes, which occur more or less on the same days every year, giving plenty of time to prepare the celebrations for each.
One thing to be aware of is that the solar calendar in the Northern Hemisphere is opposite to the one in the Southern Hemisphere. So when it s the winter solstice in the Northern Hemisphere in a place like the United States, it is actually the summer solstice in the Southern Hemisphere in a place like Australia.
Likewise, the autumn equinox in the north is the spring equinox in the south.
So although the world celebrates Christmas at the time of the winter solstice (around December 21) in the Northern Hemisphere, those in the Southern Hemisphere who wish to celebrate Christmas according to its true meaning should celebrate it at the time of their actual winter solstice, which would be around June 21 (the solstice) and the third day following (the birth of the Christ) instead. The same applies to Easter, which is a celebration of the spring equinox.
The precise time of the solstice or equinox is usually given in Universal Time (UT), which you ll need to convert into your local time.
Once you do that, you will probably end up with a time that is not exactly sunrise or sunset. To work out when to celebrate the solstice or equinox, simply find the sunrise or sunset closest to the local time you have. So for example, if the time given is 3am in your local time zone and you are celebrating the winter solstice sunrise, then celebrate it the morning of that day a few hours later. If you re celebrating the autumn equinox sunset, then celebrate it at sunset the day before.
Make sure you have your sacred space and things for the ceremony prepared well in advance so you are not rushed beforehand. Take some time leading up the ceremony to practice any mantras you ll be doing, and rehearse your ceremony until you feel confident remembering it. This will help it go smoothly on the day, but also will get you into the feel of the event as the sun and natural world progresses in its journey.
Creating a Sacred Space
Having a sacred space is very important. As humans wishing to connect with the divine, we ve always created them as temples, churches, sacred circles, etc. A dedicated space like this helps us to move from an ordinary state of mind, full of the thoughts of the day, etc., to one of inner quietness, awareness of the moment, reverence for divinity, and receptivity to spiritual feelings and learning.
A sacred space can be all the way from a huge temple to a room in your house that is dedicated to practice and prayer. Whatever the resources, the principle is the same. It becomes an energetically focused place for connecting with the spiritual.
Passing through a Gateway as a Transition into a Spiritual Place
The gate to the Ki Monastery in the Himalayas, signifying the entrance into a sacred place.
Entering a sacred place always has its requirements, as the sacredness and energy of the space must be preserved. The most powerful sacred places are where this energy has been built up and maintained by the people who used it, which they did through consciousness.
A sacred place is always entered by some sort of gate, entrance, or doorway that one has to pass through. This can serve as a reminder of the transition needed before entering the sacred space, into awareness of the present moment, reverence for the divine, respect for the principles of spirituality, etc. In ancient times and still at many religious sites today, before passing through, a person had to repeat a special phrase, bow, or say a small prayer. Some even ritually cleansed in water and put on white garments as a symbol of purifying oneself inwardly before presenting themselves before the spiritual.
This was important, for example, to the Essene community in Egypt, and to the Buddhist monks in the high places of Tibet.
A gateway to an area which has a sacred space could be a timber arch, two standing stones, or something even simpler, and decorated with special plants and symbols as was done in ancient times. A doorway into a room that is used for spiritual purposes serves in the same way. If you re looking to create
a sacred space then of any kind, make sure you have a dedicated entrance.
Choosing Your Site Design
For celebrating the solstice and equinox, it s best to create a space that aligns to the moment of either sunrise or sunset of the particular solar event you are celebrating, and gives all the participants a clear view of it. As ancient people did, you could either create one site that has multiple solar alignments, such as the Lost World Pyramid at the ancient city of Tikal in Guatemala, or as they did in the ancient British Isles, create different sites for different alignments, such as Newgrange and Knowth in Ireland.
You can get a lot of ideas of how to create a sacred site from the ancient sites of the world, which are written about in this book (and there are also many others not included). While creating most of these is far out of most people s ability, it is possible to take the concepts and designs they were based on and replicate them in simple ways.
A Guide to Creating Your Own Standing Stone/Wood Circle
A modern pagan sacred circle in Lithuania (photo copyright wiki user GiW, 2011).
One of the simplest site designs that has been used for thousands of years to celebrate the solstice and equinox in Europe is a sacred standing stone and/or wood circle. These types of circles are still made by pagan communities today, and can be put together using wooden posts and stones that can be moved into place without machinery.
The circle can be made of wood, stone, or a combination of the two, like the modern example you see in the picture here from Lithuania. It can even be made of or include plants and trees, like the sacred groves of the Druids, which there are no traces of left today.
These are some good guides for creating your own circle:
http://www.stonehenge-stone-circle.co.uk/build-stonehenge.htm
http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/history/handsonhistory/ancients_circle.pdf
Ceremonial Clothing
Romuvan ceremony in Lithuania (photo copyright Ycco, 2009).
A Romuvan ceremony in Lithuania (photo copyright flickr user Mantas LT).
There s something about wearing special clothing for special occasions. Monks/nuns, priests/priestesses, and yogis/yoginis have worn them for thousands of years, and even today non-religious people wear traditional garments for weddings.
Different colors have different vibrations and affect the way we feel. They also represent and symbolize different spiritual principles. White for example, has always been used as a color of purity, while black of dark forces (we don t use black!). White is by default the best color for any ceremony. The ancient Druids believed it was the color of the sun.
Depending on your circumstances, the clothing for the ceremonies can range from being whole custom made garments to colored headbands or scarves worn with normal clothing, or even normal clothing of the desired color (e.g. a yellow t-shirt or red jacket).
Either way, the kind we would recommend are garments made of natural fabrics that are elegant and based on traditional designs. A good example are those worn by the Romuvan community in Lithuania who are reviving the ancient pagan celebrations of their people, which include the solstices and equinoxes. They wear linen garments with sashes and beautiful symbolic jewellery.
Instructions for Ceremonies
We ve put together detailed instructions for ceremonies for each of the four points in the year. They are based on an understanding of their deeper meaning and incorporate ancient symbols and rituals from all around the world that were used in actual ancient ceremonies at the solstice and equinox.
Again, depending on your circumstances, you may do the entire ritual to the letter, or may simplify it to suit what you are able and feel comfortable doing. It could be as simple as chanting mantras at sunrise on your own or with a few friends.
To make your own ceremony, you could look at the contents of the ceremonies in the following chapters, and take the elements you like. If you're part of a group of people, you could decide amongst yourselves what you want to incorporate.
There are many places in the world where remnants of solstice and equinox celebrations still survive.
If you are in one of those places, you could try analyzing your existing traditions to see if you can find meanings in each of the elements they comprise of, such as any symbols or actions performed. Over time many traditions can become distant from the original meaning, but with a grasp of the universal principles involved (which we write about in this book), you could reconstruct a ceremony based upon your tradition, but closer to the actual ancient meaning and purpose.
Background Information on the Meaning behind the Ceremonies
It helps to understand the meaning of the event you re celebrating, at least on some level. You could be surprised, however, to find that you feel an understanding during the celebration itself that touches you in a direct way beyond words and thought, and which may even be difficult to explain to somebody else.
We ve put together detailed descriptions of the meanings of the solstices and equinoxes based on universal spiritual principles and ancient texts and sites from all over the world in this book, and even if some things go over your head at the moment, it s worth reflecting on them and the ancient texts they quote before your event.
The Value of Experience
The aim of this book is not only to re-kindle an interest in the solar cosmic nature of spirituality, but also the experience of it. Our hope is that people all over the world start celebrating the solstice and equinox again as major events in their towns and cities, with simple celebrations based on cosmic principles that everyone can enjoy connecting again with the spirit in nature through bonfires and spiritual music.
The more involved ceremonies, outlined in the following chapters, are best practiced at dedicated locations, and could become part of an annual calendar of spiritual events that people take part in and even travel to four times a year.
One of the great things about the solstice and equinox is that a tradition of their celebration exists in many cultures, so it is possible for people to celebrate it according to the culture they feel most affinity with whilst at the same time connecting with its universal meaning shared by those celebrating it according to their own. If enough people took up the universal principles of spirituality contained in these celebrations, they could help to bring a rebirth of spiritual harmony whilst at the same time celebrating the richness of cultural diversity throughout the world.
AUTUMN EQUINOX
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
A Ceremony to Celebrate the Autumn Equinox
This equinox ceremony is based upon ancient ceremonies that were actually practiced at the autumn equinox and upon the universal principles of esoteric knowledge, which have a rich symbolism found throughout the world in sites like Chichen Itza, The Pyramid of the Sun, The Great Pyramid in Egypt, and Easter Island, as well as in the mythology of Jesus, Lucifer, and John the Baptist (esoteric Christianity), the Mayans, and Mother warrior goddesses from around the world etc.
Here are some videos of this ceremony being performed:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zKkyD75cDz8
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cqVN0IM23x0
The Setup of the Sacred Circle
The ceremony begins just before the sun starts to set on the day of the autumn equinox. It takes place in a sacred circle with a place for a fire in the middle. The fire is not lit until the ceremony is underway, as lighting it is part of the ceremony. There should be a passage to the circle; this represents the passage through the underworld. A wooden ladder, a scythe, and a trident should be placed upright inside the circle before the ceremony begins. A hole should be dug close to the bonfire inside the circle, prior to the ceremony, in which to bury seeds.
If it can only be celebrated indoors, create a workaround to suit your circumstances. Likewise, if you don't have enough people for the ceremony, modify it as you consider best.
Items Needed
Here is a list of items used in the ceremony:
a wooden ladder
a scythe
a trident
a handheld container of water
sulphur (or a lit candle if you don't have any)
salt
a set of scales
a sword
four stones of different colors: black, white, yellow, and red
seed (barely, corn, rice, or wheat)
a figure made of wicker in the shape of a man
a torch (which can be lit)
a symbol of the Mother goddess (a picture or statue, which can be worn or carried any of the Mother goddesses associated with this ceremony can be used i.e. Inanna, Durga, Kali, Sekhmet, Senge Dongma, Coatlicue, or Persephone)
musical instruments: bells, gong, and drums
a number of tealight candles in containers which can be held safely
seven yellow garments or items of clothing
seven symbols of a serpent that can be worn (could be as headpieces, necklaces, etc.) A number of white and/or red garments or items of clothing
The Participants
Ideally, you would have a minimum of fourteen participants for the ceremony to fill all the roles.
Hades
A man takes the role of a guardian of the circle representing Hades, the guardian of the underworld, and stands at the entrance to the passageway. He carries a set of scales and a sword.
The Greek god Hades, guardian of the underworld, who in the ceremony is guardian of the circle (photo copyright Aviad Bublil, 2008).
The Seven Solar Bodies
Seven people dress in yellow to symbolize the seven solar bodies. Each of the seven wears a symbol of a
serpent and carries one item. One carries water (symbolizing mercury), another sulphur or a lit candle if none is available (symbolizing the element of sulphur), and another salt (salt), which are the materials of alchemical transformation. The remaining four each carry one stone: one black, one white, one yellow, and another red, symbolizing the change of energies in alchemy. The stones can be painted or can naturally be the chosen color. The seven also carry seeds of some kind such as wheat, barley, rice, or corn. They should enter the circle and line up inside it in that order with the one carrying the water on the left.
The Maoi facing the equinox sunset at Ahu Akivi are symbols of the seven solar bodies one must have created before descending into the underworld, and are represented in the ceremony as the seven dressed in yellow, the color of the sun (photo copyright Ian Sewell, 2006).
General Participants
All the remaining participants (including the torch bearer, initiate, and mother below) can be dressed in white or in red, and if white is chosen, some item or items of red should be worn as accessories (like a red sash for example), but no black garments should be worn. Some of these participants should carry the musical instruments, with at least one playing a bell, another a gong, and another a drum. Each participant who has no role in the ceremony should carry a flame as a candle or a torch.
The Torch Bearer
One of these participants should play the role of a torch bearer (the torch symbolizes the sun) and should carry a lit torch, or a candle if no torch is available.
The Initiate
A male participant will carry a figure made of wicker in the shape of a man. The wicker man symbolizes the initiate.
The Mother
A woman will carry the symbol of the Mother goddess.
Instructions for the Ceremony
They seven people dressed in yellow enter the circle first. As they enter the circle through the passageway, the guardian, who has his sword held vertically, says to each one "Remember Osiris is a dark god." They each reply "Lux in Tenebris Lucem," which means "the light shines in darkness." The guardian allows them to enter the circle. As they do, each person in yellow takes their place facing the fire and the sun, forming a semi-circle. They continue to stand there throughout the ceremony.
The general participants (apart from the torch bearer, the initiate, and the Mother) enter chanting the Mantra of Durga (explained below) and carrying a torch each, or a candle if no torch is available. Those who play the gong, drums, and bells carry them too. The guardian does not greet them in the same way as the seven dressed in yellow, but just lets the general participants pass. They chant the mantra as they enter, and take their place in the sacred circle. They stand forming a circle outside the seven in yellow and continue to pronounce the mantra until the three remaining participants below reach the guardian and the guardian makes his announcement (explained below) then they are silent.
The three remaining participants join the ceremony the torch bearer, initiate, and Mother. They walk together to the beginning of the passageway to the sacred circle. The torch bearer goes in front. Behind
him are the other two, who walk side-by-side, the female on the left and the male on the right. In the work of awakening the Mother closely accompanies the initiate.
As they are about to enter the sacred circle, the guardian keeps the sword high. They stop at the guardian and he says to those present, The mysteries are revealed to those who keep silence. At that moment all the participants who are present become silent. The silence represents the silence that must be kept when going through esoteric mysteries.
The three enter the circle with the torch bearer still in front. The guardian does not greet them as he did the seven in yellow. They stand around the fire in front of everyone else: the torch bearer at some distance from the initiate and the Mother, who stand together and both face south.
The initiate places the wicker figure on the unlit fire. The woman, carrying the symbol of the Mother, lights the fire as the sun begins to set (the torch bearer can help with the fire if there are problems with it).
There should not be a waiting period or just a short one, as the ceremony should flow. Light the fire as the first visible part of the sun begins to set. If the view of the horizon is obscured by terrestrial objects such as mountains, use the time when you see the sun setting over the terrestrial object, even though it may not have yet set across the horizon.
The burning of the wicker man, said to have been done by the ancient Celts at the autumn equinox.
When the fire is lit the torch bearer pronounces the Egyptian "hbs m pht" pronounced khebs m pekht, which means attain the star. All the participants respond "hbs m pht."
The torch bearer reads a relevant sacred text (anything relevant will do there is one from the ancient esoteric Christian text called Pistis Sophia that can be used at the end of this chapter).
Once the reading is finished, everyone chants either the Dakshine Kali Beej Mantra or the Mantra of Durga for some time, apart from the guardian who always stays at the entrance to the passageway.
The gong, bells, and drums sound, symbolizing chaos and the underworld. Then everyone stops chanting the mantra and the seven in yellow throw the seeds they were carrying into the hole by the bonfire (the seed has to die for the new to be born). The man symbolizing the initiate then buries the
seeds, covering them over with soil.
Then all lights are extinguished apart from the main bonfire, which is left burning, symbolizing the initiate s work in darkness. If there are torches they can be thrown on the bonfire; if there are candles, they are put out.
Everyone leaves in darkness chanting a mantra, different to what has been used in the ceremony so far.
Sometime later, with the sun set and the ceremony closed, a song and mantra evening can be held sitting around the bonfire. It must conclude before midnight.
Mantras to the Mother Goddess in Her Warrior Aspect
The goddess Chamunda, who has many similarities with Kali (both inhabit cremation grounds, hold severed heads, etc.), and is seen as interchangeable with Kali and Durga. She is known as a destroyer of ignorance and evil.
The following mantras can be used during the ceremony as they are particularly relevant to the celebration of the autumn equinox. They are mantras to the Mother (her aspect Kali), pleading that she destroys the egos at this time of descent into the underworld. She descends with the initiate at this stage in the spiritual work, into the underworld, to destroy the egos in sexual alchemical fire.
Like Coatlicue of the Aztecs, Sekhmet of Egypt, Senge Dongma of the Buddhists, and Hecate and Persephone of Greece, Kali is the fierce warrior aspect of the Mother who has the role of destroying the egos within us, and thus liberating our consciousness so that we can awaken.
According to Indian traditions, Kali s seed mantra is Krim. Seed mantras (called Bija mantras) in Indian traditions are thought, like a seed, to contain whole spiritual principles and do not have an easily definable literal meaning. The mantra Krim symbolizes all the work of sexual alchemy. This mantra is used to destroy the egos.
The meanings given for the mantras below are sourced from Indian texts, but they have many levels of meaning and depth.
THE MANTRA OF DURGA
Mantra: Om Aim Hrim Klim Chamundaye Vichche
Pronunciation: OHM eye-m hreem kleem chah-moon-dah-yai veech-chay
Meaning: In Indian traditions it is said that the mantra Om represents the primordial sound. Aim is the syllable of knowledge. Hrim is the syllable of purification and transformation, and dispels illusion and ignorance. It is the great mantra of the spiritual heart. It is said that through this mantra alone one can enter into the spiritual heart and the small space within its lotus in which the entire universe is held. Klim is a seed mantra that attracts spiritual energies from the sun god for protection. Chamundaye is another name given to Kali. It refers to a form of the goddess Paravati which is the destroyer of ignorance and evil. Vichche means cut, as in cutting one s egos.
Video rendition: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X_adHIWPSTA
THE DAKSHINE KALI BEEJ MANTRA
Mantra: Krim Krim Krim Hum Hum Hrim Hrim Daksine Kalike Krim Krim Krim Hum Hum Hrim Hrim Swaha
Pronunciation: kreem kreem kreem hoom hoom hreem hreem dahk-shin-ay ka-li-kay kreem kreem kreem hoom hoom hreem hreem swa-ha
Meaning: According to Indian traditions this mantra is specifically twenty-two syllables long
mantras of this length are thought to be some of the more powerful. It also contains Kali's threefold Bija mantra of Krim, Hum, and Hrim.
Video rendition: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VwQTt6nJ4v0
Daksine Kalike is referring to Kali in a particular aspect, which is when she has her right foot forward as a protector. Daksine can be taken to mean "South" as Kali is traditionally seen as facing south in the same direction as the souls who are heading south toward hell, so that she can rescue them. The word Daksine also has connections to the transit of the sun as it travels south after crossing the equator at the autumn equinox. The southern transit of the sun is also connected to the "night of the gods," so she may also be said to be facing the night.
The mantra Krim symbolizes all the work of sexual alchemy. Hum is also used in sexual alchemy, and in Buddhist traditions in this context Hum refers to one consciousness. It terms of the seed syllables, Hum refers to the immovable, the unfluctuating, and that which cannot be disturbed by anything. Hrim purifies and transforms, dispelling illusion. And at the end, Swaha is an offering and surrender of oneself to inner awareness, or a consecration into the light.
Suggested Readings
There readings are taken from the esoteric Christian text called the Pistis Sophia, which is an account Jesus gives to the disciples of the soul s journey from chaos, through many perils, until finally ascending to the Treasury of Light, the divine source.
Note: Don't read the numbers.
From the first repentance of Sophia (http://www.sacred-
texts.com/chr/ps/ps036.htm):
1. O Light of lights, in whom I have had faith from the beginning, hearken now then, O Light, unto my repentance. Save me, O Light, for evil thoughts have entered into me.
2. I gazed, O Light, into the lower parts and saw there a light. thinking: I will go to that region, in order that I may take that light. And I went and found myself in the darkness which is in the chaos below, and I could no more speed thence and go to my region, for I was sore pressed by all the emanations of Self-willed, and the lion-faced power took away my light in me.
3. And I cried for help, but my voice hath not reached out of the darkness. And I looked unto the height, that the Light, in which I had had faith, might help me.
5. Now, therefore, O Light of Truth, thou knowest that I have done this in my innocence, thinking that the lion-faced light-power belonged to thee; and the sin which I have done is open before thee.
6. Suffer me no more to lack, O Lord, for I have had faith in thy light from the beginning; O Lord, O Light of the powers, suffer me no more to lack my light.
7. For because of thy inducement and for the sake of thy light am I fallen into this oppression, and shame hath covered me.
14. Save me out of the matter of this darkness, that I may not be submerged therein, that I may be saved from the emanations of god Self-willed which press me sore, and from their evil doings.
15. Let not this darkness submerge me, and let not this lion-faced power entirely devour the whole of my power, and let not this chaos shroud my power.
16. Hear me, O Light, for thy grace is precious, and look down upon me according to the great mercy of thy Light.
21. And when I sought the light, they gave me darkness; and when I sought my power, they gave me matter.
29. For they have taken my light from me, and my power hath begun to cease in me and I am destitute of my light.
30. Now, therefore, O Light, which is in thee and is with me, I sing praises to thy name, O Light, in glory.
31. May my song of praise please thee, O Light, as an excellent mystery, which leads to the gates of the Light, which they who shall repent will utter, and the light of which will purify them.
35. For God shall save their soul from all matters, and a city shall be prepared in the Light, and all the souls who are saved, will dwell in that city and will inherit it.
36. And the soul of them who shall receive mysteries will abide in that region, and they who have received mysteries in its name will abide therein.
Here is an alternative text, which can be read as well as, or instead of the one above:
From Mary's interpretation of the first repentance (http://www.sacred-
texts.com/chr/ps/ps037.htm):
1. Save me, O God, for the waters are come in even unto my soul.
2. I sank, or am submerged, in the slime of the abyss, and power was not. I have gone-down into the depths of the sea; a tempest hath submerged me.
3. I have kept on crying; my throat is gone, my eyes faded, waiting patiently for God.
4. They who hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head; mighty are my foes, who violently pursued me. They required of me that which I took not from them.
5. God, thou hast known my foolishness, and my faults are not hid from thee.
7. For thy sake have I endured shame; shame hath covered my face.
8. I am become a stranger to my brethren, a stranger unto the sons of my mother.
9. For the zeal of thy house hath consumed me; the reviling of them that revile thee have fallen upon me.
10. I bowed my soul with fasting, and it was turned to my reproach.
11. I put on sackcloth; I became unto them a bye-word.
12. They who sit at the gates, chattered at me; and they who drink wine, harped about me.
13. But I prayed with my soul unto thee, O Lord; the time of thy well-liking is
[now], O God. In the fulness of thy grace give ear unto my salvation in truth.
14. Save me out of this slime, that I sink not therein; let me be saved from them that hate me, and from the deep of waters.
16. Hear me, O Lord, for thy grace is good; according to the fullness of thy compassion look down upon me.
17. Turn not thy face away from thy servant, for I am oppressed.
18. Hear me quickly, give heed to my soul and deliver it.
WINTER SOLSTICE
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
A Ceremony to Celebrate the Winter Solstice
Like any solstice ceremony, you can adapt the ancient symbolism and the universal principles to create your own solstice ritual, whether it s something you do alone such as being present for the event in your own home, or participating in a ritual with others.
I've created the winter solstice ceremony below as a template to use or adapt as circumstances require.
This ceremony is very similar to ones which were practiced in ancient times.
It symbolizes the central processes contained in the birth of the spiritual Son, which is symbolized by the rising sun of the winter solstice.
The ceremony relives how at the dawn of existence, the female (the chaos, the seedbed of life) is in the continuous movement of creation, initiated by the male, and in the womb of the Mother the neutral force, the spiritual Son is born.
Here is a video of this ceremony being performed:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JhUH9sv497E
The Setup of the Sacred Circle
This diagram shows the basic layout of the circle for the winter solstice ceremony. The small hollow circles represent the stones or wood used to build the sacred circle. The number of those is up to you, but the most important thing is to leave an opening for the entrance and where the sun comes in.
A bonfire is built at the center of a sacred circle that has an entrance passage.
A cross with four arms of equal length is drawn (using sand, or any other material to create a visible line), so that its arms intersect the central bonfire of the circle, but extend a distance beyond the circle, into what we'll call the outer-expanse.
The axis of the cross should align with the rising sun on the winter solstice, as well as the entrance to the circle.
At the end of each of the four arms, lines should be drawn that reach the halfway point between the next arm and point counter-clockwise, to form a swastika symbol.
Along each arm of the cross, between their outer ends and where they meet the outside of the sacred circle, seven equidistant marks should be made. In the ceremony, a woman in blue will use these markers to walk counter-clockwise in an ever-tightening spiral until she reaches the entrance of the circle, where she then will enter it.
The passage leading to the sacred circle should be on the opposite side of the circle to where the sun will rise so that people entering the circle face the rising sun as they do. To mark this passage there should be twelve markers placed on either side of the path (using either stone or wood). These markers are placed at equidistant points in between the edge of the outer-expanse and the edge of the circle.
A statue of a bull is placed inside the circle, and a pine tree is placed just outside the entrance to the sacred circle to the right (when facing the sunrise).
Here is a detailed plan for a sacred winter solstice circle with measurements, drawn by an architect: Setout Template Winter Solstice 6 Meter Diameter.
Items and Roles for the Ceremony
General Participants
White is the usual color for a solstice celebration, although other colors can be used, whether as the main color of a garment instead of white or as an accessory to the white. Each of the participants should wear some yellow, apart from the woman representing the mother who wears blue, and the man who represents the instigator of creation who wears red. One of the participants in yellow should be chosen to do the readings.
The Mother
A woman plays the role of the eternal Mother goddess. She should be dressed in blue or an item of blue, and wear a bag over her navel. In the bag she should carry a statue of the baby Jesus or baby Krishna. She should wear a headdress with the representations of two cow horns with a disk in the middle (as seen in the Egyptian goddess Hathor). This headdress can also display a serpent or serpent's head. She also needs to carry a candle or torch that can be lit with fire.
The Egyptian goddess Hathor at the Dendera Temple (photo copyright Bernard Gagnon, 1989).
The Father
A man plays the role of the great Father god. Ideally the man and woman playing the roles of the Father and Mother should be a couple. The man should wear red or an item of red clothing and a headdress with the representation of an eagle. He also needs to carry a candle or torch that can be lit with fire.
Other items needed for the ceremony are an effigy or statue of a bull, and a pine tree.
Instructions for the Ceremony
The mantras used in this ceremony can be found in the next chapter Mantras to Celebrate the Winter
Solstice .
The ceremony begins before the sun has risen. The Father stands holding a lit torch next to the pine tree. The Mother stands next to him carrying an unlit torch. The general participants in the ceremony are seated or standing behind the Mother and Father at some distance, and face the direction of the rising sun in a semi-circle.
The pine represents the creator Father, and the man in red represents the Father's word, or Vishnu, that instigates creation. The rising sun symbolizes the Son being born into creation.
The Mother leaves the Father and moves to the other side of the entrance to the passageway. When she gets there, the Father begins to chant the mantra Om and the attendees join in the chant, each at their own pace so there is a continuous sound. The Mother then walks around the circle in the outer-expanse (with the circle to her left) seven times in a counter-clockwise direction in an ever tightening spiral until she reaches the circle. The participants remain seated where they are throughout the duration of the ceremony or can stand if it is not practical to sit.
The entrance stone to the ancient megalithic temple of Newgrange, which aligns to the winter solstice sunrise. It is covered in the symbol of the spiral, which is significant to the time of the winter solstice and used in this ceremony (photo copyright 2006 wiki user Maksim).
When the Mother reaches the circle she goes inside it and stands slightly to the left. Everyone waits for sunrise chanting the mantra Om Namo Narayana.
At sunrise the Father walks down the passageway from the pine tree into the circle and lights the bonfire. He then stays inside the circle with the Mother.
While facing the sun, the Mother takes the baby out of her bag and lights her torch from the bonfire.
The man who does the readings stands up or steps forward and says, The Virgin has brought forth! The Light is waxing! and then, "Sol novus oritur," at which the participants respond, "Sol novus oritur"
towards the rising sun. The man doing the readings (who is at the front of the participants and who should not be the same person as the Father) begins to chant the mantra Om Asatoma and the participants join in with the mantra.
A painting by Bouguereau hints of subtle symbols with the light as that of sun at dawn, and the throne with a sun disk rising between the arms like the division of the two forces of male and female which give birth to the sun. This same concept can be found in ancient Egyptian temple architecture.
The Mother leaves the circle by walking back out the passageway to the edge of the outer-expanse carrying the baby aloft, and stands at the entrance of the passageway opposite the pine tree.
At this point the participants (who have been carrying an unlit candle each) light their candles, but not from the flame carried by the Mother, Father, or from the bonfire. They signify Elohim/the Beings (each of us has our own Being) coming into creation.
After the mantra has been chanted for a short time, the man doing the readings steps forward from the participants and reads some relevant sacred texts, after which the ceremony ends. The Father leaves the circle and joins the Mother so that they walk together away from the ceremonial area, and then the
participants follow in pairs.
For Doing the Ceremony in a Cold Climate
For those who live in a cold climate and who are doing this ceremony outdoors, here are a few adjustments to make sure everyone can keep warm. Although the ceremony begins in darkness, make sure to have a nice warm fire that all the participants in the ceremony can be near enough to keep warm, once the fire has been lit.
The participants, instead of remaining seated outside the ceremonial area, should follow the Mother in single file as she walks in a spiral around the circle. They should not go inside the circle however, but be seated in a semi-circle around the fire just outside of the circle, facing the rising sun. The Mother and Father should be in front as they are at the fire.
Once the ceremony ends, the participants leave in pairs following behind the Mother and Father.
If the weather is too poor to hold a ceremony outdoors, improvise one indoors instead. The bonfire can be substituted by a candle or a candlestick of seven.
After the Ceremony
Afterward everyone can sit inside the circle, get warm around the fire, and informally chant mantras or relax if they wish.
In the evening an optional informal gathering around the bonfire can be held at sunset, with music and mantras, to finish before midnight.
Celebrating the Solstice Alone
If you are alone and want to celebrate the winter solstice, you can look at the different posts on it and construct your own simple ceremony, or chant mantras, or just sit in awareness and watch the rising sun.
There is no substitute however for attending an actual ceremony with other people, which is why pilgrimages to sacred sites were so important to people in ancient times at spiritual times of the year.
Symbolism in the Ceremony
The cross created in the sacred circle forms a swastika, which symbolizes the forces of creation in
continuous movement. The cross represents the alchemical forces of creation in the union of male and female.
The pine tree represents the Father (eternal, thus evergreen). The rising sun (in the sky) represents the Son that is born from the union of male and female, as does the baby and the torch the Mother (woman in blue) lights and carries. The man in red with the torch represents the word, or Vishnu, that comes from the Father and impregnates the womb of the Mother.
The woman represents the great Mother of creation, the chaos, the darkness of the uncreated absolute source. The bag with the child in it represents the child who will be born from the womb. The cow's horns are symbols of the cosmic Mother the cow symbolizes her as the nourisher and because the shape made by the head and horns of a cow looks like a womb. The disk is in the center of the horns as she is divine. It also represents the sun, divinity, and the sun child who is born from her womb.
The seven circles that the mother makes represent seven dimensions of creation. The sacred circle represents the Earth and all the layers within it at the center of which is the divine Treasury, represented by the fire. The circle is the womb, or the stables, in which the Son is born.
The Mother moves in darkness, representing the primeval chaos, pre-matter at the beginning of the creation of the universe, the seabed of life, which is fertilized with the word and from which life springs.
The audience chanting the mantras represents divine androgynous beings who spring forth into creation, who later divide to become Angels and later the consciousness of those people and animals who live on the earth.
The bull represents the animal ego in the stables (the physical body) that the Son/Christ is born into.
Christ brings hope and works to later destroy the animal ego.
Suggested Readings
There are many readings that could be used at this ceremony, as it represents such a widely important part of spirituality. Here are some suggestions you could use:
From the Rig Veda (Translation by Prof. Raimundo Panikkar (Ref. 3, pp 58)) At first was neither Being nor Nonbeing.
There was not air nor yet sky beyond.
What was wrapping? Where? In whose protection?
Was Water there, unfathomable deep?
There was no death then, nor yet deathlessness;
of night or day there was not any sign.
The One breathed without breath by its own impulse.
Other than that was nothing at all.
Darkness was there, all wrapped around by darkness,
and all was Water indiscriminate, Then
that which was hidden by Void, that One, emerging,
stirring, through power of Ardor, came to be.
In the beginning Love arose,
which was primal germ cell of mind.
The Seers, searching in their hearts with wisdom,
discovered the connection of Being in Nonbeing.
A crosswise line cut Being from Nonbeing.
What was described above it, what below?
Bearers of seed there were and mighty forces,
thrust from below and forward move above.
Who really knows? Who can presume to tell it?
Whence was it born? Whence issued this creation?
Even the Gods came after its emergence.
Then who can tell from whence it came to be?
That out of which creation has arisen,
whether it held it firm or it did not,
He who surveys it in the highest heaven,
He surely knows - or maybe He does not!
From John, in the Bible
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.
There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. The same came for a
witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.
That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
Jesus Christ in the Apocryphon According to John, The Nag Hammadi Library I, therefore, the perfect Pronoia of the all, changed myself into my seed, for I existed first, going on every road. For I am the richness of the light; I am the remembrance of the pleroma.
And I went into the realm of darkness and I endured till I entered the middle of the prison. And the foundations of chaos shook. And I hid myself from them because of
their wickedness, and they did not recognize me.
Again I returned for the second time, and I went about. I came forth from those who belong to the light, which is I, the remembrance of the Pronoia. I entered into the midst of darkness and the inside of Hades, since I was seeking (to accomplish) my task. And the foundations of chaos shook, that they might fall down upon those who are in chaos and might destroy them. And again I ran up to my root of light, lest they be destroyed before the time.
Still for a third time I went - I am the light which exists in the light, I am the remembrance of the Pronoia - that I might enter into the midst of darkness and the inside of Hades. And I filled my face with the light of the completion of their aeon.
And I entered into the midst of their prison, which is the prison of the body. And I said,
'He who hears, let him get up from the deep sleep.' And he wept and shed tears. Bitter tears he wiped from himself and he said, 'Who is it that calls my name, and from where has this hope come to me, while I am in the chains of the prison?' And I said, 'I am the Pronoia of the pure light; I am the thinking of the virginal Spirit, who raised you up to the honored place. Arise and remember that it is you who hearkened, and follow your root, which is I, the merciful one, and guard yourself against the angels of poverty and the demons of chaos and all those who ensnare you, and beware of the deep sleep and the enclosure of the inside of Hades.
And I raised him up, and sealed him in the light of the water with five seals, in order that death might not have power over him from this time on.
Note: This ceremony was created using knowledge of esoteric principles. A little later I discovered that there is an account by ancient Greeks of an ancient Egyptian winter solstice ceremony that closely resembles this one.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Mantras to Celebrate the Winter Solstice
These ancient mantras are each relevant to the time of the winter solstice, which is a time about the process of creation, the birth of all life, and the birth of the spiritual within. The sacred texts of the ancient Hindus placed a lot of importance on sound, using it as part of a spiritual practice in their many mantras.
The ceremony to celebrate the winter solstice, which is a time of spiritual understanding and experience of these profound truths, uses mantras in the ceremony to signify the power of sound and its use in creation.
These mantras are used in the ceremony to celebrate the winter solstice given in this book.
Om (also known as Aum)
~ from The Upanishads
In the ancient texts of the Upanishads, the syllable Om (written out as Aum) represents Brahman, the supreme creator, as well as the whole of creation.
Om is the primordial throb of the universe. It is the sound form of Atma
(Consciousness).
~ Maitri Upanishad
This mantra Om indeed represents Brahman (the Absolute). It is the highest. He who knows its meaning and worships it attains the supreme goal and knows everything.
~ Katha Upanishad
In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna tells Arjuna:
"O Arjuna, I am the taste of pure water, and the light of the moon and the sun.
I am the essential nature of the mantra Om mentioned in the holy scriptures, the sound in ether, as well as the courage and virility of human beings." (verse 7.8) It is said to be the primordial sound that was present at the creation of the universe, and thus deeply relevant to the winter solstice. Pronounced OM as in the word "home," the "au" sound is an extremely subtle intonation that naturally arises when Om is pronounced. Each letter of the mantra is said to have its own significance. The A engenders everything, the U gestates everything, and everything is born with M.
"In Hindu mythology, the letter A also represents the process of creation, when it is said that all existence issued forth from Brahma's golden nucleus; the letter U refers to Vishnu, the god who is said to preserve this world by balancing Brahma on a lotus
above himself; the M symbolizes the final part of the cycle of existence, when it is said that Vishnu falls asleep and Brahma has to breathe in so that all existing things have to disintegrate and are reduced to their essence to him. Finally, the silence at the end of the mantra symbolizes the period between death and rebirth. One must not forget that this silence is an important part of the mantra." New Word Encyclopedia (source) Interestingly, the Egyptian supreme creator deity is called Atum, containing the same letters as this sacred mantra.
Om Namo Narayanaya
~ from the Sama Veda
MEANING:
O my Lord, I honor Narayana
In ancient Indian texts, Narayana is the ultimate God, whom there is nothing beyond. There are various meanings that have been understood from this Sanskrit name. Narayana is also called Vishnu, and both of these deities are depicted as resting upon water or the ocean. Naara in Sanskrit is another name for water, and it is said that Vishnu s resting place, called Ayana, is Naara, hence the depiction of both deities upon water. For this reason, Vishnu is also known as Narayana, or one who moves on the waters, just as the Spirit of God moved upon the waters in Genesis, which first created, and why this mantra is profoundly relevant to the time of winter solstice.
Naara also means the living entities, so another meaning of the name is resting place of all living entities. Narayana is also said to mean the Supreme Being who is the foundation of all humankind.
Another interpretation of the word Narayana sees Nara meaning human and Ayana as direction/goal.
Hence Narayana refers to the direction of a human (or the one that helps a human to their goal). Ayana
can also mean shelter, so Narayana can also mean the shelter of all human beings.
The Sama Veda reads: Om Namo Narayanayeti mantra upasaka Vaikuntha bhuvanam gamishyati, or
Whosoever chants the 'Om Namo Narayana' mantra reaches the ultimate goal Vaikuntha planet where one attains eternal blissful life. Vaikuntha is said to be the supreme spiritual abode, which nothing exists beyond. Vaikuntha is also said to mean no desires. (source) Om Asatoma
~ from the Yajur Veda and the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 1.3.28.
om asato ma sad gamaya
tamaso ma jyotir gamaya
mrtyor ma amrtam gamaya
om santi santi santih
MEANING:
Oh Lord, From ignorance, lead me to truth;
From darkness, lead me to light;
From death, lead me to immortality;
Let There Be Peace Peace Peace
Incredibly, this mantra is very similar to the Lord s Prayer given by Jesus, and the Prayer of St.
Francis of Assisi.
Extra Mantras for the Winter Solstice
These are some mantras which can be used for general winter solstice celebrations outside of the ceremony along with the mantras from the ceremony, such as times around a campfire, or for mantra practices.
Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya
~ from the Bhavaghata Purana
MEANING:
O my Lord, Sri Krsna, son of Vasudeva, O all-pervading personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisance unto You.
It is said in India that prostration and salutation is an external symbol of an internal union, and that by chanting mantras to aspects and forces of God, an atmosphere is created within for the contemplation of God and the sensing of His presence.
Hari Om
Om
Hari Om
Hari Om
Hari Hari Om
MEANING:
Hari Om is known as one of the most universal mantras. Hari is a name used for both Vishnu and Krishna.
It also means the One that removes all the obstacles and purifies and can be translated as the remover of ego.
I remove the sins of those who remember Me
I take what is offered in holy sacrifices
My complexion is blue in colour
Therefore I am known as Hari.
~ Lord Krishna from the Mahabaratha
SPRING EQUINOX
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
A Ceremony to Celebrate the Spring Equinox
Any solstice or equinox can be celebrated by simply being present for the rising or setting sun. There are many ways to celebrate the spring equinox. I've created a ceremony here based upon how an ancient one may have looked. I've used research and my own experience of having gone through the actual initiation it symbolizes while out of my body, and the oldest known evidence for the celebration of the event that's recorded today. Creating your own ceremony at home or with friends can connect you to the ancients and make you feel part of the spiritual cosmic order of the universe.
Here is a video of this ceremony being performed:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hOFckz9jTBM
The Meaning of the Ceremony
The journey of the process of awakening is told in the heavens if you know how to read its signs. Central to that awakening is death and resurrection; these are primary events in the return of consciousness to its origin. The return is at ascension represented at the summer solstice. Sunrise on the spring equinox signifies the resurrection, following the darkness of winter that preceded it. From this time onward until the summer solstice, the sun increases in its strength and time in the sky.
The spring equinox symbolizes the initiate's triumph over darkness and absorption into the eternal
Mother. Before resurrection, the initiate dies symbolically and spends three days in a tomb (symbolic of the womb, the underworld, and chaos of creation).
The figure of Anubis is central to this and he presides over the process from death to resurrection. In an initiation of the inner death I went through out of the body, and before resurrection, I lay in a tomb in an open granite coffin with straight sides. It was dark inside the tomb, but I looked to my side and Anubis was standing at the doorway, silhouetted by the light behind him, and with the wings of Mercury on his head. Years later, looking at these ancient relics, I find references to Anubis (and his equivalent in other cultures) depicted in the exact event I went through. So many of the symbols I'm discovering now I also discovered while going through the initiation. The hieroglyphs of ancient Egypt are not speaking of a process of actual death, nor do they represent just cosmic events, but they describe the hidden initiations of the inner worlds.
Anubis attending the initiate who lies symbolically dead, to resurrect them.
The role of Anubis in this ceremony also reflects the symbolic role of the Sphinx in the design of the Great Pyramids. The Sphinx gazes directly at the rising sun on the spring equinox, and evidence has come to light which reveals the Sphinx once took the form of the god Anubis in his form as a recumbent dog/jackal. This is described in the chapter Decoding the Ancient Meaning of the Sphinx and Its Origins as Anubis .
The spring equinox can be celebrated in many ways not just with a ceremony like the one I'm about to describe, but simply by being present at the rising sun, without any ceremony, or by chanting a mantra or by simply improvising something. It's especially difficult to be in a suitable place to see the sunrise in a city, so it can be celebrated at home or wherever you think best. The more complex ceremony is better suited to a retreat situation where all the facilities are already in place for it.
This ceremony is a simple one. It could have been made much more complex, but this captures the essence of the celebration.
It combines esoteric symbols with some of the oldest records of this event, most notably the Great Sphinx at Giza, the Pyramid Texts, and the Mahamrityunjaya mantra from the Rig Veda. The Pyramid Texts and the Rig Veda are the oldest known sacred texts in the world.
This can be done as a stand-alone ceremony, but it is really part of a three day event, which begins with the symbolic death on the first day. On the second is the time spent in the tomb, and on the third day is resurrection.
This is a ceremony for the day of the spring equinox. It's about the resurrection and shouldn't be mixed with the events that take place on the other two days in a single ceremony.
The Setup of the Sacred Circle
There should be a sacred circle, or other sacred space, with a place for a bonfire in the middle. The sacred circle will act as the tomb in the ceremony, much like the King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid.
Inside the circle, place a symbolic open coffin without a lid and with straight sides so it is rectangular in shape like the sarcophagus in the Great Pyramid of Egypt. You can also use a simple flat wooden platform on the ground. It doesn't have to be life-size; it can be a very small representation. It should be situated between the bonfire and the entrance to the circle, and aligned with the rising sun.
Also inside the circle should be a copper cauldron or equivalent bowl (symbolic of the womb) containing water (symbolizing the sexual waters of creation). On the outside of the cauldron make nine
markings from the bottom to the top, signifying nine layers of the earth, and the ninth sphere (sex). The top marking is at the level of the water, indicating the descent and re-ascent the initiate must make before resurrection.
A lit torch of fire should also be placed inside the circle just before the ceremony begins, so that it does not catch anything else alight and can be used to light the bonfire easily at the appropriate moment in the ceremony.
The Participants
One person needs to dress as the ancient Egyptian god Anubis, and should be a tall man if possible, as Anubis looks physically imposing. They should wear a mask as Anubis does, that covers their face.
Murals in ancient Egypt actually depict people dressed as Anubis and wearing a mask the artists made sure to show the ties of the mask to indicate that these were ordinary people performing a ceremony. In addition to the mask, the man dressed as Anubis should wear the feathers of the god Mercury in his headdress (symbolizing rising) they are vertical, and fan out slightly.
All the other participants should dress in white, wearing at least one item of white clothing. White garments can have yellow or gold trim. Each participant needs to have an unlit candle that will be lit
during the ceremony, and that they can hold safely.
Instructions for the Ceremony
The ceremony begins before sunrise. The coffin, cauldron, place for the bonfire, and lit torch should be ready inside circle. Anubis walks to the edge of the circle, standing at its entrance, as though standing at the doorway of a tomb and looking in. Those present stand facing the bonfire and the place where the sun will rise, outside the circle and behind Anubis.
Anubis then enters the circle and stands facing the coffin, which is in front of the bonfire, in the direction of the rising sun. He is silent throughout the ceremony and faces the coffin until the sun rises; then he faces the sun (except when he needs to move around to light the fire).
The participants light their candles themselves and begin quietly chanting the mantra Om continuously at their own pace so that there is a constant sound.
Just as the sun is about to rise a number of the participants chant the Mahamrityunjaya mantra (they can read it if they can't remember the words). The rest of the participants continue to quietly chant the mantra Om.
As the sun appears at the horizon it represents the Son rising up out of the underworld. No one plays the part of Horus or an initiate in this ceremony as the sun itself is the central figure.
As the sun rises, Anubis takes the lit torch and lights the bonfire (symbolizing the Son/Christ). When the sun has fully risen, Anubis leaves the circle and the Mahamrityunjaya mantra ends. The participants continue chanting the mantra Om for a short time and then the ceremony ends. After the end of the ceremony you could chant any mantras you feel are relevant to the occasion.
Mantras for the Spring Equinox
The Mahamrityunjaya mantra
~ from the Rig Veda
WORDS:
Om Tryambakam Yajamahe
Sugandhim Pushtivardhanam
Urvarukamiva Bandhanan
Mrityor Mukshiya Maamritat
TRANSLATION:
We Meditate on the Three-eyed reality
Which permeates and nourishes all like a fragrance.
May we be liberated from death for the sake of immortality,
Even as the cucumber is severed from bondage to the creeper.
MEANING:
The Mahamrityunjaya mantra is also known as the Great Death-Conquering mantra, and is found in the most ancient Hindu text the Rig Veda, in the most ancient core texts of it. It is dedicated to Rudra, the ancient Hindu god of death, and appears in a passage in which Soma, the nectar of immorality is offered.
The reference to the cucumber is significant, as a cucumber does not fall or separate from the vine like other fruits; it will grow, ripen, and then wither and die on the vine, producing the seeds for the next generation of plant without ever leaving the vine. This is symbolic of the cycles of birth, death, and rebirth. To leave the vine it must be picked, which is to be freed from this cycle.
The text the Siva Purana (in the Sati Khanda section) tells a story involving the Mahamrityunjaya mantra. Sukracharya was the teacher of demons. As penance, Indra set Sukracharya the task of hanging upside down from a tree above a fire with smoke billowing into him for twenty years. After Sukracharya succeeded in getting through this challenge, he was taught this life-restoring mantra so he could recover from his long period of austerity. It was later taught by Sukracharya to Rishi Dadhicha so he could recover after his body was cut into pieces (an interesting parallel with the restoring of Osiris' body which was cut into pieces as part of his passion in Egypt).
Here is a video with a good pronunciation of the Mahamrityunjaya mantra; however, don't lower the
tone at the end as it does in the video though when you pronounce it: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=buYFPZuiZHc
Here are some suggestions for mantras for after the ceremony:
Om amarani dziwanteye svaha
Tibetan mantra of the Buddha Amitayus, whose name means infinite life, who dwells in the Pure Land beyond the bounds of this world, and who is mostly depicted sitting and holding in his hands a vessel containing the nectar of immortality.
and
Om namo bhagavate vasudevaya
~ from the Bhavaghata Purana
MEANING:
O my Lord, Sri Krsna, son of Vasudeva, O all-pervading personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisance unto You.
It is said in India that prostration and salutation is an external symbol of an internal union, and that by chanting mantras to aspects and forces of God, an atmosphere is created within for the contemplation of God and the sensing of His presence.
Visualization
For an inspirational visualization of the ceremony, try looking at the artists rendition of the Sphinx as Anubis in the chapter Decoding the Ancient Meaning of the Sphinx and Its Origins as Anubis , play the Mahamrityunjaya mantra above, and visualize a ceremony at the spring equinox with everyone dressed in white as the sun rose in ancient times.
SUMMER SOLSTICE
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
A Ceremony to Celebrate the Summer Solstice
I've created a ceremony here that uses the important principles that come together to form what can be used as a template, from which a solstice celebration can be created in whatever way is suitable. It is based on the profound real meaning of this astrological event.
This is an initial ceremony which can be used to celebrate the summer solstice today. It is just a very simple one, which will be developed in future editions of this book once I have more time.
Here are some videos of this ceremony being performed:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1UpJo8mKtpw
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hIJQ2hmBMw0
The Setup of the Sacred Circle
The summer solstice sunrise aligns with the avenue off the circle around Stonehenge. At sunrise the sun shines down the avenue into the center of the stone circle.
The summer solstice is the time when the sun reaches its height. It symbolizes the height of the spiritual work to awaken the ascension and return to the divine source.
To celebrate summer solstice, it is best to create a space that aligns with the sunrise precisely on the morning of the summer solstice.
Create a passageway to walk to the circle, which aligns with the sunrise on the summer solstice and the center of the circle (like at Stonehenge). This can be set up days in advance of the event as the sun won't move significantly to ruin it.
Create a place for fire inside the circle in the middle and place a large bowl of water near the fire.
Here is a detailed plan for a sacred summer solstice circle with measurements, drawn by an architect: Setout Template Summer Solstice 6 Meter Diameter.
Instructions for the Ceremony
First Ceremony ~ Sunrise
White can be used as a default color for any solstice garment and yellow can be worn in some form symbolizing the sun (even if it's just a sash, scarf, or headband).
Just before sunrise, gather outside the circle. A person announces the start of the ceremony and then all go through the passageway chanting mantras, each carrying fire as a tealight safely and the Marigold flower called pot Marigold or Calendula (this flower was believed by the Druids to have special properties at the time of the solstice, and bears a resemblance to the sun; however, any flower can be used which looks like the sun).
Sit inside the circle facing the sunrise, leaving the passageway clear. Each person places their candle next to them. Chant mantras or gentle spiritual songs.
At the moment of sunrise, a woman lights the fire.
Chant mantras, and then recite a spiritual text, give a spiritual message you want to convey, or read a verse relevant to the spiritual sun at the end of the ceremony. One by one, each person partaking places their flowers into the bowl of water inside the circle, leaving the tealights behind safely and exiting the circle through the passageway in single file.
Second Ceremony ~ Sunset
This can be a more relaxed celebration. Before sunset, sing songs or chant mantras around the fire, improvise as you feel, and leave before midnight.
Mantras to Celebrate the Summer Solstice
The Gayatri Mantra
~ from The Rig Veda
The Gayatri Mantra, sometimes referred to as the mantra of the sun and the most supreme mantra of all, can be chanted at sunrise and/or sunset.
Here are the words:
Om bhur bhuvah svah
tat savitur varenyam
bhargo devasya dhimahi
dhiyo yonah prachodayat
PRONUNCIATION
Pronunciation in normal Latin Alphabet:
Om bhoor bhuva swahah
tat savi tur varenyam
bhargo dey vasya dhi mahhi
dheeyo yoh na pracho dayaht
MEANING
Here are just some English interpretations of the meaning of the mantra; however, there are many, and even many of the words themselves have deep and profound meanings on their own: We meditate on the transcendental Glory of the Deity Supreme,
who is inside the heart of the earth,
inside the life of the sky and inside the soul of Heaven.
May He stimulate and illuminate our minds.
O God! Giver of life, Remover of all pain and sorrows, Bestower of happiness, the Creator of the Universe, Thou art most luminous, adorable and destroyer of sins. We meditate upon thee. May thou inspire, enlighten and guide our intellect in the right direction.
Here is an interpretation of the Sanskrit words themselves:
Om: The primeval sound
Bhur: the physical world
Bhuvah: the mental world
Suvah: the celestial, spiritual world
Tat: That; God; transcendental Paramatma
Savithur: the Sun, Creator, Preserver
Varenyam: most adorable, enchanting
Bhargo: luster, effulgence
Devasya: resplendent, supreme Lord
Dheemahi: we meditate upon
Dhiyo: the intellect, understanding
Yo: May this light
Nah: our
Prachodayath: enlighten, guide, inspire
Om Tat Sat
~ from The Bhagavad Gita
From the beginning of creation, the three words om tat sat were used to indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth. These three symbolic representations were used by
brahmanas while chanting the hymns of the Vedas and during sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Supreme.
~ The Bhagavad Gita 17.23
One of the very few mantras given in the Bhagavad Gita, Om Tat Sat is said to be the three-fold designation of Brahman. Tat and Sat are said to signify the transcendent aspect of Brahman and the immanent aspect of Brahman, both of which are blended together in a universalised connotation or denotation 'Om.' It is taken to mean that God is here, God is above and God is below, and God is everywhere. The everywhereness of God includes the aboveness and the hereness of God. The aboveness is Tat, the hereness is Sat, and the everywhereness is Om. (source) Shanti Mantra
~ from the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad and Ishavasya Upanishad
Om
Purnamadah Purnamidam
Purnat Purnamudachyate
Purnasya Purnamadaya
Purnameva Vashishyate
Om shanti, shanti, shanti
MEANING
Om.
That is infinite, this is infinite.
From That infinite,
this infinite comes.
From That infinite,
this infinite removed or added;
Infinite remains infinite.
Om, peace, peace, peace.
or
Om.
That is the absolute, this is the absolute.
From the absolute,
the absolute becomes manifest.
When the absolute is added or taken away from the absolute,
the absolute remains.
Om, peace, peace, peace.
Conclusion
We hope this book provides a catalyst that contributes to the re-kindling of the celebration of the path of the spiritual sun. This knowledge is helpful to anyone wishing to participate in the process of enlightenment that ancient people once read in the messages of the cycle of the sun.
Unfortunately, this kind of esoteric knowledge today is largely derided as fantasy, but it wasn t in the past it was greatly valued. Humanity s rich heritage of spiritual, mythological, and religious texts, art, and archaeology, are a testimony to the central role esoteric knowledge played in the lives of those for whom the solstices and equinoxes and the spiritual principles reflected in them held significant meaning.
Although the key components of this ancient knowledge can be known, this is a different humanity and a different world today. It is a time when the material dominates the spiritual, where religions have lost the understanding of their universal, cosmic principles, where people think but don t see, and where spiritually numb populations are for the most part incapable of perceiving realities beyond the five senses.
Today it seems the wish to understand this kind of knowledge is mostly lost and that spiritual, social, and moral standards are decreasing. It s therefore up to the initiative of the spiritually aware to go against this tide, to take action, raise consciousness, and make a difference. Celebrating the solstices and equinoxes is a way to bring people together and to keep the connection with the spirit alive.
We hope that in time people in cities and towns throughout the world will celebrate the solstices and equinoxes in a simple way, and that sites will be created where four times a year people go to celebrate this ancient and wondrous festival, keeping alive the awareness of the spiritual sun and the incredible
knowledge it conveys.
Document Outline
" Contents
" PART I
" Chapter One
" Autumn Equinox
" Chapter Two
" Chapter Three
" Winter Solstice
" Chapter Four
" Chapter Five
" Chapter Six
" Spring Equinox
" Chapter Seven
" Chapter Eight
" Chapter Nine
" Summer Solstice
" Chapter Ten
" Chapter Eleven
" PART II
" Chapter Twelve
" Autumn Equinox
" Chapter Thirteen
" Winter Solstice
" Chapter Fourteen
" Chapter Fifteen
" Spring Equinox
" Chapter Sixteen
" Summer Solstice
" Chapter Seventeen
" Conclusion 