 Black
James M. Lamb
AuthorHouse™ LLC
1663 Liberty Drive
Bloomington, IN 47403
www.authorhouse.com
Phone: 1-800-839-8640
© 2013 by James M. Lamb. All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted by any means without the written permission of the author.
Published by AuthorHouse 10/31/2013
ISBN: 978-1-4918-2377-4 (sc)
ISBN: 978-1-4918-2378-1 (hc)
ISBN: 978-1-4918-2379-8 (e)
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013918023
Any people depicted in stock imagery provided by Thinkstock are models, and such images are being used for illustrative purposes only.
Certain stock imagery © Thinkstock.
Because of the dynamic nature of the Internet, any web addresses or links contained in this book may have changed since publication and may no longer be valid. The views expressed in this work are solely those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the publisher, and the publisher hereby disclaims any responsibility for them.
Contents
Acknowledgments
Introduction to Black
Black
“I am not an African, I am an American!”
The Black Mind
The Word Black
State of Black America
Vibrations
Ancient Egypt
Continuous Cover-ups
How does God describe Himself in the Bible
Dinknesh
The Danger
Questions?
The Moors
The Kingdom Of Ancient Ghana Why you need to know your story!
The Kingdom Of Ancient Ghana
The Mali Empire
The Songhai Empire
Dr. Martin Luther King and the Bible
The Bible
The Jewish Wars
Josephus
The Reformation
Religion
How did Christianity become so powerful?
The Role of Africans in Adopting Christianity
Persecution
Slavery
Christopher Columbus
Personal
Haiti
Christopher Columbus and King Leopold II
A Colonial or European Education
Myths
The Pilgrims
American Indians
The Christian “Law of Nations”
Looking into the European psyche
Colfax, Louisiana
Black Wall Street
The Wilmington Race Riot
The Atlanta Race Riot
The Rosewood Race Riot
The Bible and History
Africa
The Great Pyramid is Built on Solid Rock
The Temple in Man
Egyptian Medical Treatments
Black Madonna Child & Black Popes
Three Black Popes and More!
Kemet/Egypt says: before Abraham I Am
The Temple of Isis
Alert: Black Man writes most of the New Testament!
Solstice
The Galactic Year
The Pentateuch (Back to the Bible)
The Pope’s Apology
The Pentateuch (Back to the Bible) Continues
The Names of God
Africans in the Western Hemisphere before Columbus
The American Public Educational System
The War
Bibliography
About the Author
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my eternal gratitude to my Mother Florence M. Lamb who went home to be with the Lord (2008). She prayed me through all my failures and did live to witness the results of her prayers. And, to my Dad, Henry Cannon Lamb who was a man’s man and I still love and admire him to this day.
I am grateful to Bishop William Philpot, Pastor of Christ Chapel and former Pastor of Community Baptist Church in New Haven Connecticut and the Christ Chapel members who played such an important role in my life and prayed me through a self created hell.
To Richard Bullard, Pastor of Grace Evangelical Baptist Church my friend and mentor who encouraged me by his diligence in study and his vast knowledge of religious studies that inspired me to write along with the loving members of Grace.
I cannot write any book without a special thank you to Dr. Mimi Silbert Ph D., and her staff at the Delancey Street Foundation. They took my devastated life and trained me how to live. Those four years and ten months in Delancey Street were some of the best preparation years of my life.
To Lindy Fair, APN who keeps my head on straight despite my battles with PTSD.
To all my friends and fellow counselors within the Arkansas Department of Correction, thanks for all your critical insights, suggestions and your support that challenged me to continue writing.
I want to especially thank my loving and patient wife Lashauna for her undying support. Many a night as I studied, researched and wrote, she prayed and encouraged me to press on. She is a rare and special gift from God.
To my Brother and Sister who loved me in spite of how I acted for so many years. It was their undying love that rescued me many times. Without their constant love and guidance I would not be the man I am today.
Most importantly, to my son James M. Lamb II, I owe you a debt that I cannot fully repay. It is you who motivates me to continue the quest of bettering myself. It was your hope, faith and prayers, my son, which lifted me. It is the look in your eyes that took many years to earn. It is the look of love and pride I see in your eyes that continues to inspire me and move me forward.
Introduction to Black
I was born James McRussell Lamb in March of 1945 to two wonderful parents, Henry and Florence. I grew up on Rock Creek Road in Westville Connecticut in the suburbs of New Haven. My Mother told me that when I first went to School the school was considering me for a scholarship for gifted children. I don’t know what happened.
The community where I grew up was integrated with multi ethnic backgrounds and cultures. Just about every group you could think of was represented. There were success stories among the African American Community. We had some who went to private schools like Johnny and found their way to Congress in Washington and could be seen on television working right below Thomas Phillip “Tip” O’Neill, Jr. who was an American politician and Speaker of the United States House of Representatives. His brother Jamsey was one of the first hired to a prominent position with Campbell Soup. We had Maurice who became the first Black quarterback for Southern Connecticut State.
In our community I had friends I played with and grew up with who were Jewish, Italian, German, Polish and Black. My Mother told me that when I was very young that Levi Jackson, who was a football standout at Hillhouse High School (New Haven, Connecticut), and was the first African-American football captain at Yale University, and the first African-American executive at Ford Motor Company, sat me on his lap and read to me. He had relatives in the community and used to visit. Perhaps that was one of the reasons I love words.
Also, I remember Johnny Huggins, born to a prosperous Black family in New Haven. They were the only Black family that lived in one of the two predominately Jewish areas of New Haven. He joined the Black Panther Party and played a key role in organizing the Los Angeles chapter, the first chapter to open outside the Oakland Bay Area. Three weeks after his wife, Ericka Huggins, gave birth to their daughter, Mai, on January 17, 1969, Johnny Huggins was killed. I remember going over his house a few times when we were in the boy scouts together. Johnny was so far ahead of the rest of us in his thinking and willingness to engage in the struggle of freedom and the empowerment of our community.
I came from a good family. My Father had his own business, spoke three languages, taught himself shorthand, typing and he played the piano. He learned to fly a plane at 68 which was his life time vision. It was on the front page of the New Haven register I still have a copy of the article. Everyone in the family was so proud of him. He was an accomplished individual, yet he was forced to work in a factory because of the lack of opportunities for Blacks back then. My Mother was a stay at home mom who baked cookies that were soooo good and took me on walks and launched paper boats in the local stream not too far from our house.
Everyone in my family, Brothers, Sisters, Uncles and Aunts, cousins, nephews and nieces were all well accomplished in life. My older brother was so smart he worked for the government on top secret projects traveling the world and later worked for a company that sent him all over the world trouble shooting their machines that took cataracts off of eyes. My younger brother was a model who appeared on television, in magazines and various advertisements in many publications including Ebony and Essense.
Me, I dropped out of high school, began drinking at a young age, went to jail, lied, stole, became disruptive, rebellious and was completely self-centered. Although I grew up in church and had every opportunity to succeed I chose to be the consummate jerk.
The second time I was arrested; I woke up in jail and didn’t know how I got there. I was in a Blackout and did not know for years what had happened. I knew I was hanging around with the wrong crowd and going to all the wrong places. I could see a life in prison coming at me fast. When I was released from jail, I had made up my mind; I had to get away from New Haven. I went right around the corner and told an army recruiter that I needed help and I needed to get out of town. I told him my story and he helped get my charges, including breach of peace and stolen cars, waived and I entered the Army in 1964.
Somewhere near Tong Binh province, Republic of Vietnam, in the pitch Black, just before dawn, the blast shook the night, KARAABOOOM!!!! It was followed immediately by an endless staccato of machine gun and AK-47 fire. That steady noise was punctuated by the KRRUMMMPP of 40-mm shoulder—launched rockets that flashed in explosions all around. The flashes, briefly pushing back the Blackness of night, were quickly extinguished by the suffocating blanket of night as two companies of North Vietnamese soldiers overran our outposts, fire control center, communications center and one gun parapets in one swift stroke. We could not see but we heard death approaching. At the moment of the first deafening explosion, there was the sound of a man screaming, and the sound was inhuman. It sounded like a dog that had been hit by a car. The howling of that man caught in the agony of death’s grip was different from the steady screams of horror on the battlefield that night.
Later we found him. He was shot once in the side, a small entry wound, a large exit wound. It was the mark of an M16 round spinning through the body. There was also a large hole in his head, provided by the first sergeant who emptied a full clip of M16 rounds on full automatic, the muzzle pressed into the eye of the still moaning victim. The first sergeant turned to me, smiled and said, ‘Lamb, next time we catch one alive, I’ll show you how to castrate ’em.’
It was becoming light now. The enemy had broken off the fight and there was no more incoming fire. We continued to fire. We had just fired another round when suddenly I felt something I could not see “step” out of my body and rise upward and away. I fell down between the trails of the gun, stunned and suddenly almost paralyzed by fear. I was not afraid of what just happened with this being leaving my body. I was afraid because this invisible being took with him all the bravado and fearlessness that I had exhibited in the battle with him when he left. Just minutes ago I was not afraid. I was yelling orders and working along with my fellow warrior soldiers of the 2nd and 320th Artillery in the 101st Airborne Paratrooper Division. Now, I was shaken, frightened and stunned.
On December 17, 1966, I received the Department of the Army’s Award of the Army Commendation for Heroism in connection with military operations against a hostile force. According to the award signed by Major AGC Adjutant General, J. G. Brown, “private first class Lamb distinguished himself by exceptionally valorous actions near Tong Binh, Republic of Vietnam. I know that God saved my life in Viet Nam at least seven times, including the battle described above.
There was one thing about Vietnam that disturbed me. I found myself suddenly concerned about why I was there. I mean, at home we were fighting for civil rights and the ability to ride in the front of the bus and yet I was fighting people I didn’t even know and why was I doing that? Even in Vietnam I saw the racism of White people especially White officers who wanted to advance using us at as targets to write bad conduct discharges and other charges based on the flimsiest of behaviors. I saw them use creative disciplines which had Black soldiers gardening and waiting on officers just like it was the plantation. On the battlefield there was little racism because everybody had a gun but in the rear racism existed openly.
I returned from Viet Nam to find my Mother a changed Woman. After “testifying,” to me about the Lord, I was inquisitive because I knew something had happened to her and I was curious so I went to Church with her. I really wanted to see for myself just what she was talking about because it still sounded kind of crazy to me. Plus, my mom kept moving suddenly as if hit by a small electric shock and saying, “Oh, praise the Lord!” or “Thank you, Jesus!” This was really strange to me but obviously either something had happened to her or she had “lost it.”
That same week we went to a small storefront church. I walked in and sat down. The music was lively and, as the preacher began to preach, the people were moving like my mom did. They seemed to be moved by something I could not see and definitely did not feel. I looked carefully at this group of both old and young people. One thing that struck me was that they seemed like normal, ordinary people. Some of them seemed to have this “glow.” I kept looking at them and assessing the situation. They were moving and praising God and getting happy but their movements seemed at times unrelated to what the preacher was saying. Again, they seemed to be responding to something I could not see nor feel.
I went to these services for a few days and did not know what to make of all this. These people were excited about something but I just did not see or feel what all this commotion was about.
At the end of one of these services, they would pray for you by laying hands on your head. An evangelist, Sister Redmond, was praying for this young girl about the age of 14. Sister Redmond said, “I command you in the name of Jesus to come out of this girl.” A voice spoke out of that girl that a human could not produce or reproduce. The voice was not human. It was a deep and animal-like. That voice spoke out of the girl, and the sound filled the small church. Whatever was in that girl spoke and it said, “I will not come out!” The girl did not speak—the “thing” spoke out of her. Her lips did not move!
I jumped out of my seat on the pew and the guy next to me jumped. I looked at him; he was still staring straight ahead at the girl. I almost yelled, “Did you hear that?” With open, bulging eyes, staring straight ahead and mouth wide open, he managed to shape his lips to forcefully say, “Yes!” From that moment on, I was totally interested in what could not be seen. The young girl was delivered that night from the demon and went on later in life to become an evangelist herself.
But, the moment I heard that demon speak, I began to seek the Lord in earnest and had an instant and newfound respect for the Bible. At that unforgettable moment in time, everything in the Bible became very real to me.
Some of the experiences I am going to go through are real experiences I had in my quest to know the divine.
I already described the first dynamic spiritual experience of the demon speaking. After that I began to fast and pray like crazy. In my mind I felt if God is that real and can be accessed then I was going to have access. One day at noon day prayer the same evangelist Sister Redmond laid hands on me while I was kneeling at the altar. I began to feel what I would describe as a living cloud around me. My eyes were closed by I could sense this presence. I was praying with all my might, reaching from within to get closer to God. I felt this presence move away from me and I cried out with all my heart and a mouth full of emotional words of prayer. Suddenly, this presence filled me, and I do mean I felt this presence enter my being. I began to speak in words that were not my own. I had been filled with the Holy Spirit as I had heard about in the Bible and in Church.
After that it was like I knew joy at a level that was beyond words. I began to have deep spiritual experiences. I saw spirits in people. I saw a red cat looking at me inside one of my friends who was, “still in the world,” a term used for the unsaved. I saw a spider come out of a Minister and walk through a wall. I had to go to knowledgeable Ministers who “knew” the Lord to help me understand what was going on. I was told I was seeing the spirit of the people. In the case of the red cat he later went to jail for stealing. In the case of the Minster, it was later found out that he was trying to seduce young boys in the Church.
I saw a bright glowing globe with a being inside it that you could not clearly see because of a fog inside the globe come through the roof of a Church and land on a Minster who then began to use the gift of Prophecy. I knew this young man. We grew up together in the Church. He was able to read minds and I know because he told me things that only I knew and his gift allowed him to see into the future of those thoughts he read. I have since met numbers of anointed Ministers who can do that.
I had an experience in Church where there was a sudden rush of wind that entered the Church so powerful that as it went down one side of the Church pews and up the other side that people were literally pushed forward and then backward as this wind moved through the Church. As people were praising the Lord, a being I assume was an angel that you could not see, entered my body and took control from my waist down. I was really shocked as I was “taken” to the altar. There was no personal volition in this at all. I was being controlled from the waist down. When I got to the altar it was like someone I could not see put their hand on my head. I immediately shot out of the top of my head and my consciousness traveled in a moment of time to another reality. There was no pain there; there was nothing but incredible, indescribable, peace and love that permeated every part of my being. I sensed a point in the unknown distance of total Blackness where this peace and love emanated from. I could see, (sense) in 360 degrees. I was aware of the Earth. Everything in the earth that humans’ value had no meaning there where I was; had no meaning what so ever! Everything a human could value, riches, power, health and everything that happens in the Earth meant anything in that place. As a matter of fact none of it had any meaning at all in the presence of such peace and love. I was aware of my family and I knew I loved them but I wanted to stay in this place. I noticed that I was rejoicing with praise, then I was being let slowly back down into my body. The first thing I noticed when I was fully back was that this body weighs billions of pounds compared to the lightness and freedom of my being in that place. I lost my fear of death!
I have had numerous spiritual experiences that are not recorded in this book. I just want to share three visions and one more experience.
A vision is not seeing something in your mind or something that happened while using any drugs. I was not asleep when these visions took place. The first vision was seeing something moving through water. It was black and long and it broke up. I later learned of the submarine Thresher going down but I was not completely sure that this is what I saw. Today I am sure because of the visions that were to follow. The next vision I remember because it was so historic. I had just come out of my Mother’s house headed for my car. Suddenly, it was as if a huge motion picture screen was dropped out of the sky right in front of me and I saw very vividly a scene unfold before me. I saw a man preaching behind a White pulpit with a red cross in front of the pulpit and a huge red cross behind him that stretched into the sky as far as the eye could see. He was making gestures and then I saw his neck shot out and the vision vanished. I was so amazed because I thought I was looking at my future and I was thinking at the time that I was looking at how I would die, on the battle field for the Lord. A few days later Martin Luther King was shot to death. Now I have told this story in Church over the years and I know that even some Christians do not believe what I just said. You may not either but it does not change the reality of what happened in my life.
The last vision opened up like the second and in this vision I viewed the United States and it appeared as a large, pulsating, thick, brown sore on the planet with large brown tentacles that stretched all around the world. It was like it was sucking the life of the world and pulsating like a living monster. The only other image in the vision was a large green dragon on the other side of the earth just switching its tail back and forth. Then the vision ended. I do not know the meaning of this vision. Does it mean that America is becoming so evil that it has come to the attention of God? Is judgment coming? Are we going to eventually face a war with nations of the orient? I do not know but I have shared these three visions.
One day at work after I had returned from Vietnam I felt a presence behind me. I worked in a room by myself printing labels on bottles for lotion that was sent to hospitals. After I printed each bottle I placed it on a conveyor belt that sent the bottles through a drying process. As I sensed this presence behind me, I looked around. There at the back of the room was a misty cloud. In my mind I was brought back to a very young age. When I was growing up I realized that there was something wrong with the way I was living. I was in a bunk bed in a room I shared with my brother and sister who were twins. The whole family was asleep except for me. I was agonizing over the fact that I couldn’t seem to do the right thing. Other children in school were doing well, my friends were doing well but I could not seem to do the right thing. I was so upset that I was crying and praying. I remember that prayer as it were yesterday but I had forgotten all about that day on till this moment when this presence brought my mind back to that prayer. The prayer was I need help somebody out there help me. They tell me your name is Jesus. I don’t know whether your name is Jesus on not but please, somebody up there please help me. Like I said I forgot all about that day until that moment. In my mind it was like someone said to me from that day I had my hand in your life and I have suffered all these things to happen to you that you might come home and serve me.
These accounts are true and there are many more. You would think that with those kinds of experiences a person would go on to great success. Within the space of 2 to 2 and half years I had come home from Vietnam, became involved in the church heavily, got married and thought I was going to be a great preacher. What I didn’t realize was the enemy that I was preaching and teaching about was in me. I did not realize that the beast inside me had come alive again. My hunger for the wildlife grew and intensified. My ego and sense of self importance would not allow me to seek help. So once again with great opportunity around me and people who are willing to help me I chose to go crazy. I began to drink which allowed me to unleash the monster.
Over the years and after I’d written my first book there were many Christians who wanted me to write a life story and autobiography. As I thought about it my main focus was to write books to help other people stay away from the lifestyle and dysfunction I had developed. I felt and thought that to get detailed views of the many indiscretions and ridiculous behavior that lasted on and off for so many years is really not necessary to show that I was out of control. Let me put it this way, Jesus talked about the treasure in us and those who bring forth treasure out of the evil treasure or out of the good treasure of the heart; I did both. When it came to the evil treasure, I was as out of control, selfish and self-centered as you could be. I went from drinking and partying and staying out with other women even though I was married to totally disrespecting my family loved ones wife and son. I drank, smoked marijuana and eventually became involved in shooting heroin and cocaine addiction.
I was a disgrace, running around the city in a new car with the license plate Rev JML on the back, in a car that I begged my mother to give me the money for the down payment, which I never repaid after to begging again promising that I would. I was mentally and spiritually abusive to my family and while not physically abusive I was cold and callous and uncaring. I would wind up in places like bars, shooting galleries, all-night clubs and apartments sometimes not knowing how I got there, sometimes not knowing who was next to me, sometimes with no money and no recollection of what happened. I went from bar to bar, woman to woman, and drinking to drugs, now on a daily basis. It was the same behavior that gripped me in Vietnam, to escape the reality of war. The rebellion and self-centeredness developed in my youth and became the driving force of my life. I sought to pleasure myself at the expense of others.
Several times I tried going back to the church only to fail again. Several times I tried rehabilitation. I have been in several different recovery programs, many 30 day programs, some 60 day programs and one 90 day program. I had gone from what I thought was partying and having a good time to living in a car with three other men looking like and smelling like death. I had come so close to death so many times through my reckless behavior and had failed so many times in my life that I really thought I would die outside the love of God.
I eventually left my wife, a faithful and loving woman and a son who only wanted his father. I found myself at a point of such desperation and pain that I wanted it to end. I took what money I had and bought heroin with the intent of killing myself. I woke up in a field staring at the sky. My first thought was, I made it I am dead. Actually, it was a foot that bought me up. Someone found me lying in the field and was kicking me and that’s how I woke up. He said to me, get out of here, get up and get out of here. I found my way to a phone and called my brother and once again asked him for help. He drove me to a hospital out of town.
When we got to the hospital they put me in a wheelchair, I was too weak to walk. I was about 125 pounds and smelled horrible. Just before we went to the hospital doors a nurse asked me could she take off my glasses. My sunglasses were the reflecting the type, you could not see my eyes. Nurses are trained to see tragedy and ghastly wombs and respond in a way that keeps patients calm. When the nurse took my sunglasses off she didn’t realize I had been drinking and drugging for four weeks without eating. My eyes were so bloodshot you could not see any pupil, it was just solid red. The nurse saw my eyes and said ohhh, as she turned her head away.
When I entered those doors little did I know that that was the last time I would live in the grip of the monster. I was a broken, shriveled up shell of a man. When they detoxed me the stench was talked about days later. I overheard the nurses talking about the sweat, the stench and the foul breath that permeated that room.
After 30 days in the hospital I was approached by a White man who was not my counselor. For whatever reason, he wanted to talk to me. He asked me about my life, I sat down and talked with him. He’d doodled on a piece of paper while I talked. When I finished talking he told me my problem was not that I did not know how to recover, I had done it many times. He said your problem is that you do not know how to sustain it. And he told me about Delancey Street. He gave me a brochure and I read it that night. I made up my mind that I was going to leave everyone and everything. I was going to give myself one more last chance. I called home and told my wife my son my mother and my brothers and sister that I was leaving and I was not coming back. The next day this White man that I did not know drove me some 100 miles to the program where I was interviewed and accepted.
From the age of twenty-three until I went into The Delancey Street Foundation treatment center in 1988, I went down a spiral staircase of bad choices, pain, lost jobs, marital infidelity, madness, heroin, alcohol, crack and cocaine addiction, numerous hospitals, drug and alcohol programs, PTSD, accidents, attempts at recovery and frequent trips to jail.
Delancey Street is a residential self-help organization for substance abusers, ex-convicts, the homeless and others who have hit bottom. The average resident has been a hardcore drug addict for 16 years, abusing alcohol and multiple drugs and has dropped out of school in the seventh grade and has been institutionalized several times. I fit in.
Run by CEO Mimi Silbert, Delancey Street, which has four other facilities around the country, doesn’t go in much for lectures, videos, 12 steps or classes. One of the very first set of principles you learn when you walk in the door is work hard, keep a good attitude and don’t get caught up, meaning do not argue. It doesn’t cost anything to be accepted in the program. The only prerequisite is that you have truly hit bottom and have a sincere desire to change your life. It is based on a philosophy which says, ‘act as if, and you will become.’
Delancey Street operates like a commune in that all the businesses produce training and funds that keep the program going. There are no government funds involved. This is intended to give everyone a sense of involvement in his or her own recovery. In short, residents earn respect by doing the right things and paying for their recovery as they pave the way for others.
I was able to go to college, Seminary and UC Berkeley while still in the program. I owe Mimi Silbert and the Delancey Street family a debt that can only be repaid by doing the best I can do each and every day to help others recover along the way.
One day while contemplating my efforts in the American Baptist Seminary of the West, I was confronted with the challenge of continued education in a unique way. I was standing there on campus overlooking both the Golden Gate Bridge and the Bay Bridge with San Francisco in the distance as a picture perfect backdrop. I was thinking that just four years before that I was thinking that I was going to be pushing a shopping cart down the street with a wine bottle in my back pocket, mumbling to myself, or dead. I continued my education.
I am in no way proud of what I did, it was disgraceful. I am eternally grateful for the grace of God. I know that the mercy of God preserved my life. As I look back at my life it reminds me of a book my older brother gave me, it was titled “Siddhartha,” a man whose life reminded me of my own. Siddhartha is a novel by Hermann Hesse that deals with the spiritual journey of self-discovery of a man named Siddhartha. Siddhartha became the Buddha.
Although I had all these experiences, the one thing I had not done was to explore the universe within. Self discovery through meditation is one of three things I feel are the most important adventures in my life. Accepting the Lord, being filled with the Holy Spirit and meditation are the three events that are each within themselves a decisive move into higher realms of conscious awareness.
There is absolutely no substitute for introspection. Looking inside oneself without fear and learning how to correct you is the true source of personal change. Whatever the medium of change, the Bible, the 12 steps or any other source material, none will be successful or substitute for an honest look at you. As a result of my determined efforts to find out what was wrong with me I was able to translate that journey into two books that spiritually and scientifically revealed to any serious student, a true method of change. The two books, The Power to Change and The Revelation of Power, give any person seeking change powerful tools enabling change on deep spiritual and mental levels.
Unique to the recovery process for African Americans is the in depth look at low self-esteem. I remember when I was young going to a museum and having one of the guards look at my belt. The belt had markings on it similar to some type of Indian writing or symbols. The guard said that’s a nice belt you have there, then he said I didn’t even know you people could read or write. That hurt deeply and I didn’t have a response. I did not know that my ancestors had created paper and kept excellent records. I didn’t know, looking at the Olmec stone head behind him was evidence that Africans had been in the Americas before Columbus.
I could not tell you how many times I have felt insulted, demeaned and emotionally put down by both Whites and Blacks and the core root of that pain had to do with not knowing how great a people we truly are. I remember also as a child watching a television story about a Black man who had married a White woman in the South. I remember how in the end of the story Whites had chased down this interracial couple. The story ended with them running for their lives. I remember coming to my mother crying asking her why do they hate us so much? These and other numerous memories had an effect on my self-esteem. This book addresses many of the issues surrounding being Black and a White society.
It is my hope that this book and the information contained within will liberate the minds of Black and White people alike. I have engaged numbers of White people in discussions about our true history as Black people and our history of slavery and mistreatment at the hands of the White majority in America. This is not to say that there are not many fair-minded White people, there are. However, when I engage numbers of White people the clergy included there is a shroud of denial that permeates their sensibilities. I’ve heard numerous responses such as why open old wounds, why can’t you just forget those things and yet others who say if you’re so upset with your treatment in America, why don’t you just leave?
When we see stories on television or hear people talk about the tragedy of the Jews under Hitler no one complains. When we hear about the Holocaust and about how the Jews study everything that happened to them under Hitler, no one complains. It is all right for them to look at their history and learn from it but in a conversation with Whites they want to deny the reality of what we have been through. They want to know why we are killing ourselves in such great numbers today. Most times they have never studied what has happened to us psychologically or sociologically. They are so willing to blaming the victim of their brutality and then ask us why are we the way we are. It’s like for 400 years they have had their foot on our necks and then ask us in bewilderment why you are where you are in life?
This book is designed to answer some of those questions and to give insight into the mind of what it’s like to be Black in White America. This is not true of everybody that is Black in America; there are many middle-class and upper-middle-class Black people who have been successful in America. There are many Black people who have had a positive image of themselves implanted by their parents or some other significant person. This book is for those primarily who suffer from low self-esteem which further holds them back.
I remember seeing Gil Noble in an interview with a person from the CIA. When questioned about the methods and motives of the CIA this person being interviewed responded by saying our first move is to get people to fight among themselves. If necessary we will topple governments by using outside forces and install a leader of our choice. We will assist them in taking over. We will pay them and encourage them in our efforts to gain power over the natural resources of that country. Gil Noble asked about all this money that they pay to these puppet regimes. The CIA person responded by saying it doesn’t make any difference how much money we pay them, they keep their money in our bank’s, we can take it back whenever we want. When Gil Noble asked about the future plans of the CIA the interviewee responded by saying we have looked carefully into the future and realize that in the end it will come down to the rich against the poor, the have’s against the have-nots, the northern hemisphere against the southern hemisphere. That essentially translates into the Whites against the Blacks. Gil Noble questioned the moral conscience of that approach. The CIA person responded by saying if you cannot stop us from what we are doing we have no respect for you. You cannot find this interview anymore on YouTube it has been removed.
This book is not about solutions, it is about a new mind to face the problems that we see as Black Americans in White America. As a result, there is a continual struggle between White and Black in America. However, we are all Americans and if we fail to resolve the issues of Black and White in America it will only serve to weaken America. If ever there was a time when Americans of all nationalities need to come together to form a more perfect union, it is now.
I conclude this introduction with a quote from the genius mind of one of the members in Grace Evangelical Baptist Church who allowed me to use her quote which I think so powerfully speaks to where we are as African Americans and what are we going to do?
I haven’t and wasn’t going to comment on the Zimmerman trial and verdict . . . but my heart is heavy. As a mother of two amazing young Black men, sister of 3 Black men, an just overall Black male cheerleader, my heart breaks WHENEVER any mother loses her child, whether it be to violence, drugs, the prison system or just nature. My heart is heavy because why are you protesting now?! Why are you angry now?! Where is your anger, your passion for the dozens of boys you walk by on the streets and judge because of their appearance? Where is the protest for the conditions of our education system? Forget the protest and try reaching out to a young person you know. BE the change that you want to see in this world! You want REVENGE?! Save a child who is still here!!! Help raise a change agent, a judge, a lawyer, a teacher! And let’s see if you’re still mad and motivated next weekend.
Shelley Ro
Black
My first day working in San Quentin Prison was a day and an experience that I neither could nor ever will forget. San Quentin State Prison opened in July of 1852. It is the oldest prison in the state and houses the largest death row for male inmates in the United States. Eldridge Cleaver, a member of the Black Panther Party was an inmate there from 1958 to 1963. Just walking though the main gate with the huge blocks of stone on both sides and arched over the top entrance made you feel like you were entering into something so thick, solid and permanent intended to convey a feeling of solid weight and pressure that is crushing you, a visual, permanent tomb.
Stepping into one of the cell blocks was overpowering. First there was the noise that assaulted my ears. The overpowering sound of so much humanity stacked one on top of another. People reduced to animal levels of verbal outbursts from everywhere along one solid wall. Everywhere the smell of fear, sweat and human secretions covered by the antiseptic smell of cleaning agents, in a vain, failed attempt to cover the human misery was an overwhelming experience. The cell block was 84 cells down the side of one wall, 420 men on one side and 420 men on the other side and five wings just like that 840 men apiece. The cells and cat walks were five tiers high. The height and length was so imposing that it seemed as if I had stepped into the bowls of a huge slave ship. Each cell had men packed together into spaces that limited everything except the private hell and thoughts of their own mind, if you could think beyond the noise. There was no air conditioning.
There were two men to a cell with a bunk bed, an abbreviated version of a toilet and sink combined at the back of the cell. There was a metal plate with small holes over the bars of the cell to protect against fluids and other objects being launched at some unsuspecting staff person walking by. You had to really peer into the cell to see the assortment of faces mangled by life experiences that had contorted some faces and hardened others. On the top tier it was so hot that no deodorant could hold back the sweat that popped out of the skin in a continual flow forming dark spots, under your arm pits and on your shirt along with sweat running down your face. It was a sudden, dramatic attempt by the body to cool itself down. The overwhelming majority of these men were Black and Brown people, men of African descent. And this was just one of thousands and thousands of Prisons with men mainly of African descent.
To all these men behind prison walls this book is dedicated. You are the reason and the passion of my research and words. May you find guidance and vision for a new successful future life inside or outside of prison. But for the grace of the almighty, I would be one among many thousands of those trapped in a cage designed mainly for people of color and poor people of any color.
“I am not an African,
I am an American!”
“I am not an African, I am an American!” My jaw dropped and my mouth came open slightly and nothing came out. I stood there looking directly into the eyes of an older, neatly dressed and well groomed elderly Black man. I was struck by the words that shot out of his mouth with such passion and directness. He was not yelling, just emphatic is his response to my sermon. He stood there as if for emphasis without saying anything else with his voice but communication continued to flow out of his etched taught face. His eyes were clear and piercing. We were locked in a hand shake, attached at the eyes and locked in a moment of two truths.
You will find in the pages to follow a clear division between the images that have been projected about Africans, African-Americans, Blacks and Brown people through every media you can imagine. The two truths are that some of us as Black people are so dedicated and loyal to the United States of America and have struggled so long to be accepted that we believe in the depths of our heart that we are Americans. The man who stood before me, I imagine was a man like that. He probably struggled with prejudice all his life. Maybe he struggled and prayed right along with Dr. Martin Luther King and other civil rights activists. For so long he may have dreamed about becoming a full citizen and being finally able to vote. He appeared to be a man who prayed and waited patiently to become accepted by the dominate society. And now when told that he was African with all the negativity surrounding that word, that was more than he could bear and therefore came the words, clear and powerfully put with pride and agitation at the implication that he was African; “I am not an African, I am an American!”
We are Mothers, Fathers, sons, daughters, nieces and nephews. We are doctors, lawyers, judges, teachers, writers and entrepreneurs. We are jet Black, blue Black, dark brown, brown-skinned, dark skinned, light skinned, light bright, almost White, redbone, high yellow and we are African and more precisely Ethiopians because that is where the creation of man began in Ethiopia. The whole family of the earth came from the earth of Ethiopia. We are the Mothers and Fathers of all the sons and daughters of the world. We are visionaries, innovators, dreamers, creators, leaders, builders and poets, playwrights, preachers, pimps, vocalists and filmmakers, hustlers and Harvard trained thinkers, we are jive-talkers and colossal rectums, civil rights leaders, Black power advocates, beboppers and hip hoppers. We are agitators and faint hearted assimilators, Afro centrists and integrationists and a cast of countless millions, from the outhouse to the White house; we are a great and noble, beautiful and diverse race of people. But, we do not control anything.
So join me despite the fear, anger and shame that may grip you to explore the word, Black!
Even among so called, well-educated people, the belief that the Continent of Africa was a great area of land, mostly jungle, populated by savages and vicious beasts is the common belief. It was beyond belief that great civilizations could have been born and developed in wisdom and power with numerous empires spanning the so-called Dark Continent. It is true that there is some accepted true wisdom about the current and past cultural achievements of Egypt, but Egyptian history was distorted so that it was conceived of as a European land rather than as a country of Africa. Even a look at a drawing or globe clearly showed Egypt to be in Africa. However others imbedded thought of the Sahara desert as a formidable barrier and conveniently divided Africa into two parts: one, north of the Sahara, was inhabited by a European-like people of high culture and noble history: the other, south of the Sahara, was inhabited by a dark-skinned people who had no culture, and were incapable of having done anything in their dark and distant past that could be dignified by the expression of African history. Such ideas of course now are well known and are far from the truth. But it is not difficult to understand why these ideas persisted, and, unfortunately, still persist in one form or another in the mind of many today.
The Egyptian theology and understanding of the cosmos existed as an unbroken historical thread that began and developed within Egypt for almost three thousand years before being spread across the Mediterranean world by the Greeks until it finally came to rest in the Roman Empire and, in particular, in the Palestine of Jesus’ day where, if we can view the saga of the Gospels, it was adopted by Jesus and his followers as a new theological system.
There are reasons why the people of Africa, with the notable exclusion of Egypt, were depicted as uncivilized, unsophisticated and lacking in cultural achievements. A number of religious people in Europe would have been struck with horror if they knew of the cruel and bloody acts of their country men in the course of the inhuman slave-trade. Ruthless European adventurers with greed oozing from their pours like hot sweat, promoted the hunting down of men, women and children like beasts. The destruction of complete villages in order to capture the inhabitants and sell them like cattle, despite the cost in human suffering, became common place. The slave-traders would invent on purpose, fantastic tales of savagery about the Africans so that their capture and the brutal transportation of them in stinking, stifling and stuffed ships to labor on the plantations of the Americans would appear to be acts of Christian concern and high minded enlightenment. There are some who believe that to this day.
You have to realize that up until about 1959, Africa was dominated by the colonial powers. And by the colonial powers of Europe having complete control over Africa, they projected the image of Africa negatively. They projected Africa always in negative light—jungles, savages, cannibals, nothing civilized. And, naturally it was so negative; it was negative to all African Americans. African Americans began to hate Africa. We didn’t want anybody to tell us anything about Africa, and much less call us an African. And in hating Africa and hating the Africans, we end up hating ourselves, without even realizing it. I have paraphrased this from a quote of Malcolm X
As a result of 400 years of slavery a slave mentality has been developed within the African American psyche. A slave mentality will neglect to educate him or herself which in turn creates more mental slavery. A slave state of mind will promote attitudes that betray and commit other crimes against his or her own community and other people instead of helping to break the chains of poverty by earning an honest living or spending money with each other. Slavery produces a frame of mind that will perpetuate self-hatred through committing violence on people of the same ethnicity, including murder, which is a form of genocide, in their own community. A mind that has been enslaved will deal, buy and or use drugs that will make him or her and others function as addicted slaves to drugs, slaves to misery and slaves to defeat. A present-day slave minded person will promote the wicked ways of his own slavery to disrespect and abuse women and disrespecting his elders passing that behavior on to his children. A contemporary slave bread to breed will abandon his or her children leaving them for someone else to raise while not caring about their fate. Is this an accurate picture of what we see more and more of especially in the inner cities of America? A current slave-minded person will foolishly commit crimes that cause him or her to end up behind bars, and incarcerated and in mental, spiritual, drug and physical bondage.
The significance of African history is hidden both subtly and overtly with the specific purpose to deny anything worthy of the name of history to Africa and the African peoples. This widespread and highly successful endeavor has been maintained through some five centuries. That there are those who have erased African history from the general record deliberately is a plain fact. Just the history covered in this book with regard to the contributions of African civilization should be quite conclusive to thinking and open minds that our history has been hidden.
The remarkable intellectual integration with which Egyptian priests thought and wrote about such subjects as creation, the soul, resurrection, judgment beyond the grave, and eternal life is still a part of the belief system of most religions of today. Egyptian thinking on these subjects appeared to me to be theologically indistinguishable from the beliefs that formed the core of modern religious faiths today, a faith that conveyed to you that Christianity was a singular historical event without human precedent. This information needed to be hidden from the masses. The world view of Europeans was projected through every form of media possible, that it was they who created an image of themselves as the creators of everything great.
In the initial years when the slave trade was in actual fact getting under way, some Europeans were claiming parts of Africa, in particular Egypt, as an addition of their continent and their culture. The term later became the Middle East. Throughout this period, most of the history books were written to justify the slave trade and the colonial slavery system that followed. For that reason, any truthful writing of African history today must take this fact into consideration.
African slavery which began around 1400 AD lasted more than four hundred years. Africans were kidnapped from Africa. Africans were forced to work day and night on plantations and in mines without pay. We were flogged, hanged on trees, starved to death, and burned alive, castrated, stripped of our culture, and reduced to a sub-human level.
Due to the harsh and cruel conditions imposed on Africans by Europeans during their kidnapping, shipping and working us without pay, it is estimated that more than 100 million Africans were killed during that sad period of African history.
In his book, The Destruction of Black Civilization, Black scholar, Chancellor Williams informs us that history has proven that a number of tactics were employed by European anthropologists and historians to blot out, change and distort Black accomplishments. These are some of the observations about how anthropologists and historians chose to operate, paraphrased from his book:
Europeans purposefully ignored or refused to publish any facts of African history that would not support their racial theories and ideas. They created a religious and so-called scientific doctrine to ease the White conscience for oppressing and enslaving African people, which included changing the color of ancient images including God, Jesus and the disciples. They proceeded to and still flood the world with thrown together made-up African histories that contain European perspectives only. They began to rename people and places. They even replaced the African names of persons, places and things with Arabic and European names. When one nation conquers another nation and its people they write a new history and this process continues to this day disguising the true Black identity and accomplishments of Black people historically.
Europeans created new methods of defining race to infect the minds of the world. For example, one drop of Black blood in America makes you a Black person, no matter how light your skin. When reporting ancient history, they reverse the standard. They make one drop of White blood render someone a Caucasian no matter how dark the skin. This applied directly to the images of Blacks in Egypt. Pictures in books and National Geographic depicted African/Egyptian/Black people with long straight hair and skin coloring that made them look almost Polynesian. When you are growing up seeing this and nothing else you are being programmed to believe that those pictures are the truth.
The Black Mind
Your brain and your mind are both extraordinarily complex. How we learn is in itself a complex process. If we break down the process of learning in a more simple way, then we can more clearly understand how we learn. Let’s look at a three step process. First, the brain takes in information and you learn through what you see, hear, smell, taste, and feel. Second, the brain processes the data in terms of how this information relates to you as a person. Third, after processing the information, your brain tells you what action to take based on the information you have stored in your brain. There is a saying: garbage in and garbage out. This means that bad or negative information brought in, allowed in or impressed on the map of the brain will produce negative actions and behaviors which produce negative consequences. And, the reverse of that is true, positive information taken in will produce the thinking, action, behavior and consequences that are positive and beneficial.
Susan Taylor, who is an American editor, writer, and journalist, gives us an insightful quote. She served as editor-in-chief of Essence from 1981 through 2000. In 1994, American Libraries referred to Taylor as “the most influential Black woman in journalism today”. She said, “Self-hate is a form of mental slavery that results in poverty, ignorance and crime.” Simply because, when you do not feel good about yourself, it is hard to feel good about anything or anyone else. You see everything in life with a suspicious, distrustful eye. You begin to miss the value and worth of every experience because you do not feel worthy. You limit yourself because you do not feel good about who you are or what you do since you are being taught through the language, (as I will show) that you are not a person of worth. You hold yourself back because you do not believe what you want is worthwhile, ultimately because you are not worthy. You put yourself in positions and situations that are abusive or unproductive and wonder why you keep getting negative outcomes in life. You feel bad about yourself and ashamed because of the things you have done.
Self-hatred is a vicious cycle that leads to self-destruction. It fills the world with hate and people with despair The only way to get out of the cycle of self-hate is to allow yourself to be re-educated as to who you are.
The brain takes in information only through the sensory perceptions of the body’s five senses. When growing up the brain changes physiologically and psychologically as a result of personal experience. The environment in which a brain operates determines to a large degree the functioning ability of that brain. For example, enriched environments unmistakably influence the brain’s growth and learning as well as negative and poor environments.
Emotion plays a dual role in human learning. First it plays a positive role in that the stronger the emotion connected with an experience, the stronger the memory of that experience, that is if the stimulus is positive. Emotion drives attention, and attention drives learning, problem solving, behavior, and just about everything else. That is why the emotional power of negative black images and ideas plays such a significant role in the education of our children. The emotion is driven deep into the psyche and psychic pain is deposited into young innocent African American minds.
What is the power of the subconscious mind and emotions in learning? When we think before we decide or act, we do so with our conscious mind and its emotional content associated with words. But life is full of actions at every step and every moment, not all of which are results of our conscious decisions. There are several actions which are controlled by the subconscious mind and its emotional content. We are not in control of the actions governed by our subconscious mind and that is crucial in understanding what happens to the mind of the African American child. We grow and mature to gain control but in a young mind the emotional content and subconscious prompting come first.
There were various obstacles and challenges in our development on life’s journey. And, based on whether our actions as a result of our thinking had positive or negative impact on us, we also made important judgments on do’s and don’ts, things we should do and what we should not do. We made our own judgments on where the life’s challenges lie, what they look like, and what you should do in life to avoid them. The problem is that we started making these judgments very early in our life when we were children and did not have the capability to truly judge the situations. But based on our child brain, we did pass some important judgments about do’s and don’ts in life. We accumulated some learning and created a knowledge base both before and after we entered school. We passed internal judgments about ourselves, about the people around us; about what type of people are good and what type of people are bad.
If some of these experiences get repeated, may be purely by chance, our illogical beliefs get the support that we subconsciously try to seek: “See, I told you so”, we tell ourselves.
In case of physical reflex action, there is some action or disturbance in or around you, and before you know or you realize it, your body reacts to the disturbance. But immediately after the reflex action, you know how your body has reacted. However in case of subconscious behavior or the mental reflex action, most often, our conscious mind is not even aware that we have reacted to certain below conscious stimuli and the emotional content of the subconscious.
It is said that the conscious mind is logical, analytical. Subconscious mind is illogical. And since most of our behavior is governed by the subconscious mind, you can imagine what will be the outcome.
As African American children, our mental, cerebral and intellectual capacity has been negatively affected and continues to produce a mind that creates more negative emotional upheaval and chaos as both the conscious and subconscious mind continue to use negative thoughts to promote a perceptual, subjective and psychological dysfunctional living processes. This shows up in our interactions and our communities. These perceptions about Black words, ideas, concepts and theories are many times repressed into unconscious levels and are actually have become an entire world of ideas, yet they are consciously treated as though they do not exist. Certain perceptions, thoughts and energies may exist that are never acknowledged or uttered as a concrete form of mental reality—ever! We continue to deny our self hatred of our Black selves. However, this repressed information base becomes the substratum from which habit forces are formed and unleashed as shame guilt and self hatred.
Devastating self hatred, shame and guilt feelings also destroys the function of our authentic selves. Clear psychological disorders of shame develop out of the false portrayal self. Debilitating shame is the greatest form of learned domestic violence that there is. It, along with low self esteem, destroys human life. Incapacitating shame is the core of most forms of emotional illness. Overwhelming shame is the affect which is the source of many complex and disturbing inner states: depression, isolation, and self doubt, isolating loneliness, paranoid and compulsive disorders, splitting of the self, a deep sense of inferiority, inadequacy or failure, the so-called borderline conditions and disorders of self-importance. This is why it is so easy for Black people to put themselves down in language, music and movies with no remorse.
Shame and guilt plus the impact of growing up in a shaming environment affect an individual’s life. Debilitating shame affects our ability to form loving relationships, honor ourselves adequately and may impact our future generations. Healthy guilt says, “I made an error or a mistake, and I can patch up that mistake.” When a person’s guilt and shame becomes neurotic, it becomes a statement of what the person is. A person says, “I am a mistake, everything I do is flawed and defective.”
All of us have in our subconscious mind a list of items about which we think we are “not ok.” Therefore, most of our unnatural or abnormal behavior is due to the second category of “Not OK” items in us based on Black words. These are items of which we formed some judgments about ourselves very early in childhood, “I am not ok” Then in our childhood, they were reinforced into our subconscious mind. These could also be associated with some embarrassing experiences when we had to be ashamed of our own self, creating a “Not OK” judgment about ourselves.
These are things which we would like to forget about and not think about and so we try to push them under our conscious thinking and not think of them. They may go out of our conscious mind, but remain in our subconscious mind. These are our subconscious pain points. As Black people unless someone gives us a positive self image in spite of the outside negative influences we remain in internal pain and try to escape by means to numerous to name.
When we experience these subconscious pain points, we are overcome with some strange senses and our reaction may not be very controlled or out of control. These could well be the same feelings and sensations that you first had when you had the unpleasant experience as a kid, such as in my case in fifth grade finding out I was “Black.”
All along we tried to push these feelings “under the carpet” and banish them from our mind. In such situations, we become absolutely helpless in our actions. If you pick up any newspaper and look at the headlines we are creating, ask yourself why are we doing this? It is because we are totally driven by our negative development of the subconscious and we are not in proper control of ourselves, our children and our communities. Whenever we face that situation which touches our subconscious pain point about being Black, we always compulsively react with very little control. However hard we try and decide to act differently, when it comes to the real moment, we are helplessly overcome by that same sensation and feeling and we act predictably (against our true wishes) based on our subconscious mind.
African American children learn by many methods such as television, magazines and other media that show Whiteness as the standard of beauty, goodness, power, and privilege. Black children also observe and learn by watching law and order techniques such as police behavior. Black children learn in the Black church about a colorless Christianity thereby negating and self worth that can be transmitted on a weekly basis. African American children learn from their parents in the home life. What are the educational beliefs in the home? Where are the employment opportunities in the community? And they learn by the living conditions that are in the community and in the home and whether or not the child has a sense of being valued or loved in the home and in the community. Black children learn by observation of and if the development and availability of health care systems are in the community. Their social justice observations lead them to becoming aware of unfair White privilege in government and in business generating all kinds of misplaced emotions. African American children while experiencing discriminatory societal structures in the community and in government begin to develop feelings of powerlessness. Unless these subjects are dealt with in the home by conscious aware parents this becomes a growing problem in the child. I know personally because I went through this exact process.
The condition of the neighborhood such as the characteristics of whether it’s urban or suburban whether it’s clean, poverty-stricken or whether it’s a mean or friendly environment. Our children also learn in school through the teacher relationships, the attitudes of the teachers, principals and those figures in authority, the attitudes of peers and friends and whether or not there is an availability of mentors in the community. Children learn through observing business and educational opportunities or the lack thereof and the relationship with their White peers in school. Black children develop definitions of reality based on their personal sense of what is real, worthwhile and important for him or her as he or she attempts to adjust and adapt to the environment and make logical decisions. Those children who live in home environments with parents who constantly manifest feelings of defeat or helplessness will tend to exhibit the same traits. The same is true with regard to a child’s contact with other institutions. If these other institutions teach them self respect, responsibility for their actions, or the importance of a high academic achievement, they will tend to grow and become self-respecting, responsible, and good students, assuming the teaching process is not interrupted by another negative societal factors or negative thoughts and emotional content within the child.
The identity and its complex nature is essential in the development from its inception and beginnings to its construction and function as the central reference point for translating and processing the experience thereby shaping consciousness. Through the shaping of consciousness the shaping of experience and behavior African Americans and Africans in general have permitted the historical process crucial to the construction of our identity to be controlled by Europeans and White Americans and in doing this we have given up our self-control and self determination to Europeans. This lack of self-control, self determination, the resultant, reactionary relationship we have to the world as well as to our own feelings are the central causal factors in the maladaptive behavior in children that is difficult to change. This collective and individual African personality is self destructive and must be dealt with by Africans and African-Americans who must take responsibility of the inherent right of Africans to construct themselves and their own images and the construction of their identity for the purpose of learning to create for ourselves. We were created to create and you cannot not create; something, positive or negative, individually or on a community or national scale, you, we will create.
We must come to an understanding as to what we perceive as our needs, desires, ideals and goals that have been manufactured and implanted in us by Europeans through the use of language for the benefit of Europeans at the price of the destruction of our humanity, physical bodies, community and our future. We must understand that we can only achieve authentic honor, fulfillment, love, respect, security feelings, a sense of belonging, and distinction through self empowerment which is one the missions and purposes of this book.
The Black male and female is central to the community’s structure, social consistency, stability, capability, adaptability, self-defense and liberation from oppression and exploitation. Traditionally it has been the male component of an exploited community that is targeted by the exploiters who themselves are usually males. Consequently oppressors typically target the male component of the oppressed community for relatively more intense repression, containment in ghettos, imprisonment, humiliation, emasculation, social disparities, political and economic discrimination, personality assassination and various forms of physical suppression. Now follow closely the next section. Make sure you go through all the definitions because then and only then can you see the complex way in which our minds have been infected with this negative self view, created by others.
The Word Black
The following is from the book written by John Bradshaw in 2005 called, Healing the Shame that Binds You: Recovery Classics Edition. This man Bradshaw has made a whole career out of what follows and he was not faced with being neither Black nor the social reinforcements of that word on a daily basis.
Ten years ago I like he had one of those life-jolting discoveries that significantly changed everything. He named the core demon in his life “shame.” This means that he became aware of the massive destructive power shame had exerted his life just as it happened in my life. I like he, discovered that I had been bound by shame all my life. It ruled me like an addiction. I acted it out; I covered it up in subtle and not-so-subtle ways; I transferred it to my family, my clients and the people I taught. Shame was the unconscious demon I had never acknowledged, just like he didn’t. In becoming aware of the dynamics of shame, I came to see that shame is one of the major destructive forces in all human life. And, just like he did in naming shame I began to have power over it.
The following words and many more, identify, describe and give meaning to the Black experience. Be patient and look at all the definitions while numerous they just scratch the surface of the problem with the word, Black. This word is imposed upon young, innocent, African American minds and absorbed through the words in the English language. Before I go into the psychological, physiological and sociological damage done by these words I just want to present them with a slightly broader context so you may see more fully the power of these words.
A noun is described as a person place or thing. A verb, typically expresses action, state, or a relation between two things, and that may be inflected or turned into a part of the understanding of a word for tense, aspect, voice, mood, and to show agreement with their subject or object. In this case we are talking about the noun African Americans, (people) and the verbs, adverbs and synonyms that give broader meaning to African Americans.
An adverb, typically expresses some relation of place, time, manner, attendant circumstance, degree, cause, inference, result, condition, exception, concession and purpose of African Americans.
A synonym is a word having the same or nearly the same meaning as another word, in the language, as joyful is to overjoyed or glad. It is a word or expression accepted as another name for something.
An adjective is not able to stand alone it is dependent on the subject or noun. Let me be clear about this; all these expressive words and parts of the language describe African Americans, Africans, Blacks and anyone with one drop of African blood.
Let us begin: Black as an adjective describes Africans as, lacking hue and brightness; absorbing light without reflecting any of the rays composing it.
It (black), characterizes Africans and Blacks by absence of light; enveloped and in darkness. This is quite plain in its descriptive force. As pertaining or belonging to any of the various populations characterized by dark skin pigmentation, specifically the dark-skinned peoples of Africa, Oceania, and Australia. African-Americans are further described as soiled or stained with dirt: Gloomy; pessimistic; dismal: a Black outlook.
Please do not forget and I will be repeating this information for clarity along the way. An adjective is not able to stand alone it is dependent on the subject or noun which in this case is directly attached to Blacks, African-Americans, Africans etc. We are described as being harmful; inexcusable and considered the worse and what we do as the worse by using phrases like, a Black lie.
We are described as hostile and threatening: Black words; Black looks.
Without any moral quality or goodness; evil; wicked: His Black heart has concocted yet another Black deed. The other night I was watching a documentary about Hitler and what the Nazi’s had done to the Jews and other “undesirables.” These were all White people committing these crimes and yet at the finale of all that was done and in all its evil the announcer said. We have looked into the Black heart of Hitler, connecting Black with evil. White people did it but Black is reinforced as evil.
We are further described as being liable, (worthy of blame) a hindrance or a disadvantage with the likelihood or probability of having, without prior investigation, having a Black mark on one’s record. We in the minds of others are marked by disaster or misfortune.
Again, a synonym is a word having the same or nearly the same meaning as another word in the language and once again these words are associated with Black, African-American, etc. Look at these words misadventure, mishap, accident, adversity, affliction, disaster, calamity, and catastrophe, a cataclysm referring to adverse happenings often occurring suddenly and unexpectedly. Repeatedly, anything that could go wrong is associated with being Black. Black areas of drought and Black Friday: Even wearing Black or dark clothing or armor is associated with Black: the Black prince. This technique is used in movies where the good guys where White hats. Or the leading Black character must die.
In the minds of the creators of dictionaries and the purveyors of these thoughts that define others, the use of the word Black, according to them, has these meanings attached which means that our being Black is based on the grotesque, morbid, or unpleasant aspects of life: Black comedy; Black humor and that which is undesirable. Not desirable or attractive; objectionable: undesirable qualities. According to the definitions, adverbs and adjectives means that we are looked upon as being sub-standard and deviating from or falling short of a standard or norm: A quality lower than that prescribed by law. We are looked upon as constituting a greater than normal risk potentially dangerous, and that includes areas of finance, housing, even life itself. Pilots put a Black flag next to the ten most dangerous airports. Illegal or underground: The Black economy pays no taxes. We as a people are considered deliberately false or intentionally misleading: Black propaganda. Can you believe that all this is programmed into people before they actually meet Africans here in America or if they never meet us as a person or a group of African Americans? And, where ever the English language goes around the world, this ugly picture of Black people goes with it.
If you are feeling overwhelmed, well we are just getting started looking at the related words that describe Black people. According to the meaning of Black we are soiled, a verb when used with the subject, (Black or African-American etc.), we make things unclean, dirty, or filthy, especially on the surface: to soil one’s clothes. To smirch, smudge, or stain: To sully or tarnish, as with disgrace; defile morally: to soil one’s good name. And when used without the subject but the inference is there anyway. We become soiled: White soils easily. Here are some definitions right from the dictionary that demonstrate and re-enforce the point. It is the act or fact of soiling by association with Blacks, the state of being soiled by Black people because of some kind of contact. A spot, mark, or stain. We are described as dirty or foul matter; filth; sewage. (Ordure); is a word that is a noun meaning dung; manure; excrement. There is not much left to the imagination. It is all spelled out in the meanings… we are considered dirty, soiled and human waste.
Let us look at the word gloomy as it relates to being Black. Dark or dim; deeply shaded: gloomy skies. Causing gloom; in other words we cause gloom, we are dismal or depressing, and we are depressing: a gloomy prospect. Filled with or showing gloom; we are sad; we are dejected, or melancholy. Hopeless, we are hopeless or we are despairing; we are pessimistic: a gloomy view of the future.
The synonyms attached to being gloomy are that we are obscure (in the movies important parts etc.), shadowy, dusky; lowering (we bring things down), threatening, (oh yes we are portrayed as threatening). And of course we are all of the following: Downcast, downhearted, despondent, depressed, glum, dispirited.
Again, let me say this: The brain takes in information only through the sensory perceptions of the body’s five senses. When growing up the brain changes physiologically and psychologically as a result of personal experience. The environment in which a brain operates determines to a large degree the functioning ability of that brain. For example, enriched environments unmistakably influence the brain’s growth and learning as well as negative and poor environments.
Emotion plays a dual role in human learning. First it plays a positive role in that the stronger the emotion connected with an experience, the stronger the memory of that experience, that is if the stimulus is positive. Emotion drives attention, and attention drives learning, problem solving, behavior, and just about everything else.
And these words go on. We are considered to be dismal an adjective describing us as causing gloom or dejection; we are gloomy; we are dreary; we are supposed to be cheerless; and melancholy: dismal weather. We are to be characterized by ineptness or lack of skill, competence, effectiveness, imagination, or interest; pitiful: Our team played a dismal game. The descriptions under dismal go on, we are disastrous; calamitous unlucky; and sinister. And, the synonyms of dismal describe us as hopeless, abysmal, and dreadful.
Now looking at this particular group of words that we are all being taught we are supposed to be looking out for and considering that our children are exposed to this before and after entering school, no wonder over fifty percent of our children are not graduating from High school when they are exposed to this language on a daily basis.
These words that describe us even go so far as to say we are obsolete! Do you understand what that means?!! We are no longer of any general use. We are considered fallen into disuse, worthy to be discarded, extinct or considered nonexistent, now you can see why when you walk by even White people you know, many times they act like you do not exist. We are considered, imperfectly developed or rudimentary in comparison with the corresponding character in other individuals.
The influence of this body of word information called the English language affects and changes African American children first and continues to affect adults without their knowledge of the devastating impact and effects of these words. Whether it is explicitly designed to indoctrinate societal, psychological and or organizational values or not: it does in fact do that. The information regarding the word Black contained in the English language is communicated generally in a one-sided conversation regarding its authority and impact through teachers, books and conversation. The language takes an authoritarian and a hierarchical stance to persuade and educate the masses. No full awareness on part of a learner or student is necessary for the future outcome to take place. In the case of school the instruction is contractual and consensual by way of the State public education system. The student, learner and parents are in support of the system and participation in the process is expected.
I find that the group that has created these definitions of reality attempt to retain people forever in the position of the definitions for the purpose of exploitation, subjugation and subordination. The focus is on learning about the projected reality, the broader goal is a complete word knowledge base for the negative development of the individuals who are targeted. This narrow but focused goal of swaying people’s opinions promotes the ideas, objectives and desires of the creators of this word system or program for a specific goal. It is designed to push into the world and into the minds of the target population a closed system of logic that will allow no real input of positive information, because there is no African history, (lies by omission) to compare the inner definitions of the self with or logical criticism of the self because of the absorbed negative self-image through language.
It is the specific goal to enhance one group over another by this hidden agenda designed to individualize the targeting of those who are Black. Blacks are being changed one step, one word at a time into a people with a complete philosophy designed to perform the duties of the designers and serve them. It mentally puts Blacks down and gives an unfair competitive edge to others in every area and keeps the target group unaware of what is going on along with the changes that are taking place subconsciously. While at the same time you are exposed to words like freedom and equality and post Blackness.
Control of the target groups mind and if possible the physical environment to create a sense of powerlessness, fear and dependency is expected through this process. Keep the target group unaware of what is going on and at the same time induce guilt, intimidation and a desire to be liked and loved. Those who are using any of these tactics and many others are attempting to move you, (if you are Black) from positive logical information base about yourself to an emotional playing field that is not level. The purpose is to manipulate your emotions with any one or a combination of these tactics and produce stress. Therefore, the high levels of blood pressure, heart attacks and increasing levels of suicide in the Black population.
There are two basic types of attacks: overt aggression and concealed aggression. When the creators of this system are determined to have something and they are open, direct and obvious in their manner of fighting, their behavior can be labeled overtly aggressive. Such as young Black men being shot by White policemen under circumstances that does not warrant their deaths. For those reading this let me make this clearer. If Black policemen were shooting and killing White youth, believe me there would be a public outcry such as you have never seen. Possibly, every Black policeman would be disarmed until the situation was brought under control. But, since the lives are Black, well you know! It’s just a few bad cops, they say.
When the creators of this false negative reality, they are out to prevail, dominate or control you, but they are subtle, underhanded or deceptive enough to hide their true intentions. Their behavior is most appropriately labeled covertly aggressive. Thus they avoid any overt displays of aggression while simultaneously intimidating the target group into giving them, (the dominating White group,) what they want. It is a powerful, manipulative maneuver. That is why stealthy, covert, crafty aggression is most often the vehicle for interpersonal and group manipulation. Phrases like a post racial nation is nuts. Everything revolves around race, even though it should not, it simply does. But, through denial on the part of the oppressor, race and discrimination does not exist or you have got to prove it to their satisfaction.
We as Black and Brown people are being subjected to political and psychological warfare purposely imbedded into the English language. Listen carefully to the following and see how this applies to Africans here in America; Political warfare is the intended use of political means to compel an opponent to do one’s will, based on hostile intent. The word politics is a process by which groups of people make collective decisions. The term is normally applied to the art or science of running governmental or state affairs. It also refers to behavior within civil groups including governments. However, more clearly seen today, politics can be observed in other group interactions, including corporate, academic, and religious institutions. It consists of social relations involving authority or power. In other words, all these groups of people make decisions designed to compel their opponent to do their will based sometimes on its or their own hostile intentions. It is the use of power and authority to compel and herd other people in a particular direction of thought and action. If you think the election of President Obama will change this process, you are wrong. While this is a wonderful demonstration of how great America is on the one hand, on the other hand there is a backlash that is painfully evident. And, what is so ironic about this is the very people who could help solve the problems of America as in the past through inventions and creations that have benefited all in America, are the ones targeted by this sinister process.
The term political describes the calculated and well thought out interaction flanked by one’s government or group in power and a target audience, to include another country’s government, military, and/or general population. And, since we as African Americans are described in the English dictionary as being hostile used as an adjective with regard to the following:
1. of, pertaining to, or characteristic of an enemy: a hostile nation. (In this definition we are the enemy, all of us as a nation). 2. opposed in feeling, action, or character; antagonistic: hostile criticism. 3. Characterized by antagonism. 4. Not friendly, warm, or generous; not hospitable.
As a noun we are: 5. A person or thing that is antagonistic or unfriendly.
6. Looking at African Americans in military terms we are. An enemy soldier including anything that could be produced by us such as enemy planes, ships, etc.
So you can see how groups of people, governments, and certain organizations within governments, corporations, religious institutions, congress, and politicians can use a variety of techniques to force certain actions, thereby gaining virtual advantage over an opponent or enemy by virtue of the language regarding African Americans. The techniques include propaganda; by propaganda I mean that it is a form of communication that is aimed at influencing the attitude of the African American community toward some cause or position so as to benefit the dominant or controlling group.
Propaganda, in its most basic sense, presents information primarily to influence an audience. Propaganda is often biased, with facts selectively presented as lies by omission, used when omitting an important fact, deliberately leaving another person or group of people with a misconception. Tactics like leaving out African contributions to human civilization promotes the idea that there were no contributions.
Lying by omission includes failures to correct pre-existing misconceptions also known as a continuing misrepresentation of the truth. Lying by omission is designed to encourage a particular creation of thought action and behavior. Or, it uses loaded messages to produce an emotional rather than rational responses to the information presented. The desired result is a change of the attitude toward the subject in the target audience to further a political, or other type of agenda. Propaganda can be used as a form of political warfare especially when it is forcefully denied by the group using it.
Psychological operations which serve national and military objectives respectively include words and images, with a hostile and intimidating political purpose. Psychological operations are created for planned, premeditated, intentional and tactical military objectives. And, they are intended for what is considered or designated hostile military and civilian populations.
Political warfare’s insulting nature leads to weakening or destroying an opponent’s political, social, or societal will, and forcing a course of action favorable for the dominant cultural and political national interest. Political war may be combined with violence, economic pressure, subversion, and diplomacy, but its chief aspect is with the use of words, images, and ideas. Therefore the use of the English language is a perfect weapon when programming a whole population through its use on a constant daily basis.
The creation, deployment, and continuation of these coercive methods are a function of statecraft for nations, governments and people in power and they serve as a potential substitute for more direct military action. For instance, methods like economic sanctions, like the prison industrial complex designed to lock up African Americans in mass. Or impediments to progress like last hired first fired are intended to inflict the necessary economic damage to force change. The utilized methods and techniques in political war depend on the nation’s or groups political vision and composition. If that vision stated or not is to keep a group of people in bondage then the composition of the political, economic and social warfare through the use of language is a tool to accomplish those ends.
The ultimate goal of political warfare is to alter an opponent’s opinions and actions in favor of one country’s or dominant groups interests without the necessity of utilizing military power. This type of organized persuasion or coercion also has the practical purpose of appearing to be saving lives through avoiding the use of military violence in order to further a country’s or groups political goals. Thus, political warfare also involves the art of heartening friends by bringing them into the same system of oppression and disheartening enemies by labeling them as militant, disloyal, unpatriotic, trouble makers or any other negative terms thus gaining help for the dominate groups cause and causing the abandonment of the enemies causes be they legitimate or not. Generally, political warfare is distinguished by its hostile intent and through potential escalation; but the loss of life is an accepted consequence as in the case of police brutality and intimation.
Political warfare can be used in an overt method such as the use of violence and force or a covert manner such as the use of words in the English language to form a psychology in order to exploit internal differences, Black on Black crime, disputes and general disagreements within a so-called, adversarial group. Not White on White crime when it came to World War II.
An aggressor can also create new tensions for an opponent, to include between the target group, Black and Brown people and their neighbors, potential trading partners, and allies in other ethnic groups. Moreover, an aggressor or dominant group must be mindful of an opponent’s national decision makers and leaders, and exploit any tensions and weaknesses, creating divisions while potentially gaining support for its own objectives. That is why on any real important issue regarding Black people and their leaders a Black person who opposes or splits the focus of the leader can always be found and get ample news and TV coverage.
Political warfare may be employed against electoral politics such as the Willy Horton ads, political and economic policies that negatively affect the African American communities. New voting rights acts like “voter id,” designed to make it more difficult to vote Techniques like propaganda attempt to manipulate an opponents’ actions, motives, and intentions by understanding and undermining and targeting their cultural, social, and political interests. Even secret so called “Black” operations can be used against African Americans.
A Black operation or Black op is a covert or hidden operation that can be a military, intelligence or local law enforcement operation clandestinely carried out and, often, outside of official channels. Covert operations aim to fulfill their mission objectives without any parties knowing who sponsored or carried out the operation. It is normally sponsored by taxes from the government. Black operations involve extensive arrangements so as to be able to hide the fact that the Black operation ever occurred.
Under United States law, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) is the sole US Government agency legally allowed to carry out “Covert Action.” The CIA’s authority to conduct Covert Action comes from the National Security Act of 1947. President Ronald Reagan issued Executive Order 12333 titled in 1984. This order defined covert action as “special activities”, both political and military, that the US Government could legally deny. The CIA was also designated as the sole authority under the 1991 Intelligence Authorization Act and in Title 50 of the United States Code Section 413(e). The CIA must have a “Presidential Finding” issued by the President of the United States in order to conduct these activities under the Hughes-Ryan amendment to the 1991 Intelligence Authorization Act. These findings are then monitored by the oversight committees in both the US Senate and the House of Representatives. As a result of this framework, the CIA has the most oversight of any other government agency. The Special Activities Division (SAD) is a division of the CIA’s National Clandestine Service, responsible for Covert Action and “Special Activities”. These special activities include covert political influence and paramilitary operations. The division is overseen by the United States Secretary of State.
Typically, these kinds of operations, foreign and domestic involve activities that are highly clandestine and often outside of standard military or police protocol or even against the law. Black ops missions often fit into the category of plausible deniability. Plausible deniability is, at its root, credible, plausible and believable but not necessarily true. It is the expressed ability to deny a true fact or allegation, or to deny previous knowledge of a fact. The term most often refers to the denial of blame in (formal or informal) chains of command, where upper rungs isolate the blame to the lower rungs, and the lower rungs are often inaccessible, meaning confirming responsibility for the action is nearly impossible. In the case that illegal or otherwise disgraceful and unpopular activities become public, high-ranking officials may deny any awareness of such act or any connection to the agents used to carry out such acts.
In politics and espionage, deniability refers to the ability of a government or group of people to act and avoid detection by secretly arranging for an action to be taken on their behalf by a third party—ostensibly unconnected with the target group. In political campaigns, plausible deniability enables candidates to stay “clean” and denounce advertisements that use unethical approaches or innuendo based on research may also refer to illegal or unethical means of gathering potentially damaging information on candidates, such as accessing credit reports, wiretapping, theft of files, hacking computer files, and interviewing ex-spouses. Generally, “plausible deniability” can also apply to any act that leaves little or no evidence of wrongdoing or abuse.
Plausible deniability is a legal concept. It refers to lack of evidence proving an allegation. Standards of proof vary in civil and criminal cases. In civil cases, the standard of proof is “preponderance of the evidence” whereas in a criminal matter, the standard is “beyond a reasonable doubt.” If your opponent lacks incontrovertible proof (evidence) of their allegation, you can “plausibly deny” the allegation even though it may be true.
Now that you have seen a more expanded view of the mental warfare waged against those who are Black and Brown people, let us continue to look at these words. I know you may not want to look at this material but it is important for you to understand the magnitude of this effort to turn people of great history and world accomplishments into what you are now seeing on the front pages of every news paper and every news broadcast. The projection is that Black is evil.
More words that describe us are boding and ill: I put these two words together because of the obvious implications that will be shown in their definitions. I am sure you will see how this understanding plays into the future thinking of those who wish to pursue a course of action which includes the continued subjugation of African Americans and people of color everywhere.
Boding and ill stand out in terms of their power to project a view of us into the future. Boding means to be an omen of; foreshadowing the future: The news bodes evil days for him. It means: To announce beforehand; to predict. The word ill and, do not dismiss this because all these words are directly related to Black and therefore Black people. I am going to comment on this list of definitions and you make the decision as to whether you think it’s good or bad. Please be aware that I am not commenting on every word, just areas where I believe I can add clarity as to the belittling intent. Look closely at all these words that continue to broaden the mental picture of what it means to be Black.
1. Of unsound physical or mental health; unwell; sick. (We lead in the United States in negative physical health) 2. Objectionable; unsatisfactory; poor; faulty: ill manners. (We are not doing well in school and in the minds of many; our presence in America is objectionable). 3. Hostile; unkindly: ill feeling. (This is the image shown in movies quite often, television and in music). 4. Evil; wicked; bad: of ill repute. (Again, in movies, television and in music and we get rewarded for playing negative parts, Denzel Washington, “Training Day”). 5. Unfavorable; adverse: ill fortune. 6. Of inferior worth or ability; unskillful; inexpert: an ill example of scholarship. (We can be expected by teachers to do less than out best). 7. An unfavorable opinion or statement. 8. Harm or injury. 9. Trouble, distress, or misfortune: 10. Evil. 11. Sickness or disease. 12. in an ill manner. 13. Unsatisfactorily; poorly: 14. In a hostile or unfriendly manner. 15. Unfavorably; unfortunately. 16. with displeasure or offense. 17. Faultily or improperly made. (This opens up all the so-called studies to “prove” that we are inferior). (We came from monkeys etc.).
And the related Synonyms are: Unhealthy, ailing, diseased, and afflicted. Not being well. 1. These words describe us as being wrong, wicked. 2. We cause hurt, pain, affliction, misery. 3. Calamity. 4. We act with (Depravity). 5. Illness, (We cause) affliction. 6. (We behave) badly.
Let us look at the word sullen. The adjectives for this word are listed as: 1. Showing irritation or ill humor by a gloomy silence or reserve. 2. Persistently and wordlessly ill-humored; miserable. 3. Indicative of gloomy ill humor. 4. Depressing or dismal. 5. Sluggish. 6. Obsolete. Malignant, this word deserves a closer look: 1. disposed to cause harm, suffering, or distress deliberately; feeling or showing ill will or hatred. 2. Very dangerous or harmful in influence or effect. 3. Pathology (this means the logical path of this kind of person or thinking and acting pattern) a. tending to produce death. b. characterized by uncontrolled development. In other words as we grow population wise, we are like a cancer that grows so we produce death.
Do you see how all these words are connected to form a picture in the mind? If you think this is overkill or is designed to destroy you are right. The creators of this system of thought want to leave no doubt about how you should think about Black people and how Black people should think about themselves and their community.
Look and listen: 1. disposed to cause harm, suffering, or distress deliberately; feeling or showing ill will or hatred. This is why when you talk about Black people to Black people or about White people, the first thing they say is, is this reverse racism? Or, do you hate White people? Since White is the opposite of Black and Black is bad then White must be good, so to be for Black means you are against White. Of course that is not true but this is how the information that has been absorbed into the subconscious depths of Black peoples mind is processed and comes out.
Mostly, Black people do not think about what they say and why they say it in terms of self analysis. Most of our responses are based on learned processes over the numbers of years we have been on earth because all these words relating to Black and White are being programmed into our minds and subconscious minds every waking moment. We are supposed to be very dangerous or harmful in influence or effect. We are considered very treacherous and this applies to people in power and how they view us especially the criminal justice system, police, prosecutors and judges. Not only that but we are considered harmful in our influence and the effect or results of coming in contact with us. You can create countless situations and exchanges where this Black and White thinking informs everyone’s interactions.
To continue the investigation of these words you add the synonyms to the word sullen and of course these are more words that are connected directly to Black people. 1. Cross, glum. 2. Sulky, moody, sour, bad-tempered. 3. cheerless, clouded, overcast, somber, mournful, dark. 4. slow, stagnant. We are automatically viewed as being unwilling to talk or be sociable; sulky; morose somber and gloomy.
So when you walk into a store or fast food place and a Black person acts like the above descriptive words, realize that those words are becoming us and how we relate to ourselves and others. Again, the next time you walk into a store and get treated like the above words you will know that the person acting like that does not even know how that has happened to them and by now it is natural with him/her even in the community where there is a predominance of Black people. Our interaction with each other has become negative. We are well programmed from birth through the very words we learn. And, those that act out those words confirm the reality of the words. Now it is becoming a normal part of the social fabric of much of the African American community. We are words and becoming more and more those particular words. Look at the following definitions and see if Black people and Black communities are moving in these directions. Of course I am not talking about every Black community; just the ones you know apply to this description. I am sure you know the difference.
Hostile as an adjective means: 1. of, pertaining to, or characteristic of an enemy: a hostile nation. (In this definition once again, we are the enemy). 2. Conflicted in feeling, action, or character; antagonistic: hostile criticism. 3. Characterized by aggression. 4. Not friendly, warm, or generous; not hospitable. As a noun we are: 5. a person or thing that is antagonistic or unfriendly.
The synonyms of hostile describe us as: 1. Warlike, aggressive. 2. Adverse, averse, contrary, hostile, inimical (which means; harmful, unfriendly, hostile, unfavorable). Further synonyms of hostile are: 1. Adverse in tendency or effect; unfavorable; harmful: a climate contrary to health. 2. Unfriendly; hostile: a cold, hostile gaze. The word hostile indicates that which characterizes an enemy or something injurious to one’s interests. Hostile refers to the spirit, attitude, or action of an enemy: They showed a hostile and menacing attitude. adverse refers to an antagonistic or injurious tendency or influence: Their remarks were detrimental to his reputation.
Threatening as an adjective puts it this way about us: 1. Tending or intended to menace: threatening gestures. 2. Causing alarm, as by being imminent; ominous; sinister: threatening clouds. 1. To utter a threat against; menace: 2. to be a menace or source of danger to: 3. to utter or use threats. 4. To indicate impending evil or mischief.
Evil is the next word that describes Black and by association, Black people. We are going to continue to look at these multiple words so that you might get a small view of the enormity of this reality. This word evil also covers a religious and spiritual perspective because it deals with morals. Now when we look at evil as an adjective, here are the ways we as Blacks and African Americans are looked at in the minds of others. And, I am not saying that many people White and Black have not overcome this, I am just revealing the programming that takes place with words. There are many White people who do not see African Americans as evil, bad or any of the other negative words ascribed to us. Also, there are many White people who raise their children not to judge other groups of people. So, I am not saying all White people are one way or another. This information is provided so that informed people Black or White can make better decisions. But, to continue looking at the tremendous onslaught of negative words thrown at us, here are some of the definitions of evil as it relates to African Americans.
1. (We are considered) morally wrong or bad; immoral; wicked: evil deeds; an evil life. 2. (We are considered) Harmful; injurious. 3. (We are) Characterized or accompanied by misfortune or suffering; unfortunate; disastrous. 4. (We are guilty of) due to actual or imputed views. 1. To attribute or ascribe a meaning that is automatically assumed that we are guilty. 2. To attribute or credit (something disgraceful), as to a person. 3. With regard to the Law. To charge (a person) with an act because of the conduct of another over whom one has control or for whose acts or conduct one is responsible. 4. With regard to Theology. To attribute (righteousness, guilt, evil etc.) to a person or persons vicariously, meaning taking the place of another person or thing; to ascribe as derived or coming from another. Bad conduct or character: an evil reputation. 5. We are marked by anger and irritability. 1. We are easily provoked to anger; very irritable: 2. Characterized or producing anger. 3. We are easily provoked to anger. 4. We are characterized by anger.
Now let us take a closer look at the word imputed and why it is so important to this discussion and study of the English language. Let us take a closer look at how this word relates to the description of African Americans, Blacks and Brown people.
Imputed means that even though you may not have done the deed or be guilty of anything. It is to be imputed means that it is implied that you have done it without any evidence being brought to bear on the situation. What that means is that you are presumed guilty until you prove otherwise. That means with regard to the law (#3) and Theology (#4) it’s like the curse of Ham really exists or that we are where we are because it was predicted to be this way or written in the Bible that we should be where we are in life. Just think of how powerful that indictment is. A Judge may look at us like that. The Court many look at us like that. Christians may look at us like that and be willing to kill in the name of God. Misguided people kill in the name of God and think they are doing the will of God. As you can see, that word imputed is powerful when you understand the full implication of what it can do.
Now I know this is a sensitive issue when it comes to the Bible but think for a moment, do you think God would say this or is it more likely that the following scriptures was a man’s idea or group of men’s ideas?
Nu 31:15 And Moses said unto them, have ye saved all the women alive?
16 Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against the LORD in the matter of Peor, and there was a plague among the congregation of the LORD.
17 Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him.
18 But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.
De 13:6 If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;
7 Namely, of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth;
8 Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:
9 But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.
10 And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the LORD thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.
Now to get back to our study of the word evil as it relates to the word Black and its impact on the thinking, actions, behaviors and consequences of those exposed to these words.
Evil as a noun, we are described as: 6. that which is evil; evil quality, intention, or conduct: to choose the lesser of two evils. 7. The force in nature that governs and gives rise to wickedness and sin. 8. The wicked or immoral part of someone or something. 9. Harm; mischief; misfortune: to wish one evil. 10. Anything causing injury or harm: 11. A harmful aspect, effect, or the consequence of being evil. 12. A disease. As an adverb, and this is deep: We are considered the devil or devils. 13. in an evil manner. 14. The evil one, the devil; Satan.
John 10:10 the thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.
So, once again you can see how we are portrayed as the devil or devilish and evil.
The definitions of wicked with these adverbs and adjectives continue to stain the brain: 1. Evil or morally bad in principle or practice; sinful; iniquitous: wicked people; wicked habits. 2. Mischievous or playfully malicious: 3. distressingly severe, as a storm, wound, or cold: a wicked winter. 4. Unjustifiable; dreadful; beastly: wicked prices; a wicked exam. 5. Having a bad disposition; ill-natured; mean. 6. Spiteful; malevolent; vicious: a wicked tongue. 7. Extremely troublesome or dangerous. 8. Unpleasant; foul: a wicked odor.
The Synonyms that go along with wicked are just as injurious: Unrighteous, ungodly, godless, impious, profane, blasphemous; immoral, wasteful, corrupt, depraved, dissolute; heinous; infamous, villainous, felon, atrocious, demon, depraved, devil, deviltry, evil, fiend, fiendish.
So, the next time you are watching television and it is a documentary about religious history you will “see” what I am talking about. When they show angels, God or Jesus they will be White. When they show the devil, demons or some evil manifestation from hell it will be red or Black generally not White.
Censure as a noun the word censure means: 1. Strong or vehement expression of disapproval. 2. An official reprimand, as by a legislative body of one of its members. 3. To criticize or reproach in a harsh or vehement manner. 4. To give censure, adverse criticism, disapproval, or blame, condemn. Condemnation, reproof, reproach, reprehension, rebuke, reprimand, stricture, reprove, rebuke, chide.
Disgrace as a noun disgrace means: 1. the loss of respect, honor, or esteem; ignominy; shame: the disgrace of criminals. 2. A person, act, or thing that causes shame, reproach, or dishonor or is dishonorable or shameful. 3. The state of being out of favor; exclusion from favor, confidence, or trust: courtiers and ministers in disgrace. 4. To bring or reflect shame or reproach upon: to be disgraced by cowardice. 5. To dismiss with discredit; put out of grace or favor; rebuke or humiliate: to be disgraced at court. So now you can just imagine what a judge might be thinking when he is looking at an African American. This system my just explain some of the reasons why we as Black people are incarcerated at a much higher rate than White Americans.
Synonyms: Don’t forget that a synonym is a word having the same or nearly the same meaning as another in the English language. And, it is a word or expression accepted as another name for something. So, here are the synonyms for the word disgrace: 1. Disapproval, disapprobation, notoriety, taint. Disgrace, dishonor, ignominy, infamy imply a very low position in the opinion of others. Disgrace implies the disfavor of others: to be in disgrace. Dishonor implies a stain on honor or honorable reputation; it relates especially to the person’s own conduct: He preferred death to dishonor. Ignominy is disgrace in which one’s situation invites contempt: the ignominy of being discovered cheating. Infamy is shameful notoriety, or baseness of action or character that is widely known and recognized: The children never outlived the father’s infamy. 2. Disfavor, odium, obloquy. 3. Dishonor, defame, stain, sully, taint. 4. Degrade, disapprove.
While this exercise seems repetitive and somewhat exhaustive, it is necessary to both explore and to know the depth of these harmful words, expressions, concepts and philosophies of thought. This vast array of negative words in the English language help form the mental pictures of how others view African/Americans and Black and Brown people generally. When these words are woven into the tapestry of mental pictures and people absorb this information both on the conscious and subconscious levels it becomes the working reality of most people. Let us look at more words that are directly associated with Black.
Grotesque as an adjective grotesque means: 1. odd or unnatural in shape, appearance, or character; fantastically ugly or absurd; bizarre. The meaning of grotesque as a noun is: 2. any grotesque object, design, person, or thing. The synonyms related to grotesque are: 1. Distorted, deformed, weird antic and wild.
Morbid as an adjective morbid means: 1. Suggesting an unhealthy mental state or attitude; unwholesomely gloomy, sensitive, extreme, etc.: a morbid interest in death. 2. Affected by, caused by, causing, or characteristic of disease. 3. Pertaining to diseased parts: morbid anatomy. 4. Gruesome; grisly. The synonyms related to morbid: to be corrupt, wicked, or perverted. The synonyms for depraved are: evil, sinful, debased, reprobate, degenerate; dissolute, profligate; licentious, lewd.
Immoral to be immoral as an adjective means: 1. Violating moral principles; not conforming to the patterns of conduct usually accepted or established as consistent with principles of personal and social ethics.
Licentious As an adjective means: 1. sexually unrestrained; lascivious; lewd. 2. unrestrained by law or general morality; lawless; immoral. 3. Going beyond customary or proper bounds or limits; disregarding rules. Lascivious As an adjective means: 1. inclined to lustfulness; wanton; lewd: a lascivious, girl-chasing old man. 2. Arousing sexual desire: lascivious photographs. 3. Indicating sexual interest or expressive of lust or lewdness: a lascivious gesture.
Abysmal as an adjective abysmal means: Extremely or hopelessly bad or severe: abysmal ignorance; abysmal poverty. Hopeless As an adjective means: 1. providing no hope; beyond optimism or hope; desperate: a hopeless case of cancer. 2. without hope; despairing: hopeless grief. 3. impossible to accomplish, solve, resolve, etc.: Balancing my budget is hopeless. 4. Not able to learn or act, perform, or work as desired; inadequate for the purpose: As a football player, you’re hopeless.
The synonyms that could be used in place of abysmal or hopeless and mean the same things are: 1. beyond repair, remediless, and incurable. 2. Forlorn, disconsolate, dejected, despairing, despondent, desperate all with the idea of describing the absence of hope. Other synonyms are used as a feeling of futility and passive abandonment of oneself to fate: Hopeless and grim, he still clung to the cliff. Despairing refers to the loss of hope in regard to a particular situation, whether important or trivial; it suggests an intellectual judgment concerning probabilities: despairing of victory; despairing of finding his gloves.
Despondent is another word for hopeless and it always suggests melancholy and depression; it refers to an emotional state rather than to an intellectual judgment: Despondent over ill health, he took his own life. She became despondent and suspicious. Desperate conveys a suggestion of recklessness resulting from loss of hope: As the day approached, he became desperate. It may also refer to something arising from extreme need or danger: a desperate remedy; a desperate situation.
Dreadful As an adjective means: 1. Causing great dread, fear, or terror; terrible: a dreadful storm. 2. Inspiring awe or reverence. 3. Extremely bad, unpleasant, or ugly: dreadful food preparation; a dreadful hat.
Iniquitous As an adjective means: Characterized by wrong or wickedness; wicked; sinful.
Nefarious As an adjective means: Extremely wicked or villainous; iniquitous: a nefarious plot.
Vile as an adjective means: 1. Wretchedly bad: a vile humor. 2. Highly offensive, unpleasant, or objectionable: vile slander. 3. Repulsive or disgusting, as to the senses or feelings: a vile odor. 4. Morally debased, depraved, or despicable: vile deeds. 5. foul; filthy: vile language. 6. Poor; wretched: vile workmanship. 7. of mean or low condition: a vile beggar. 8. Menial; lowly: vile tasks. 9. degraded; ignominious: vile servitude. 10. of little value or account; paltry: a vile recompense.
Odium as a noun means: 1. intense hatred or dislike, especially toward a person or thing regarded as contemptible, despicable, or repugnant. 2. The reproach, discredit, or opprobrium attaching to something hated or repugnant: He had to bear the odium of neglecting his family. 3. The state or quality of being hated. The synonyms for odium include these words: detestation, abhorrence, antipathy.
Obloquy as a noun has the following meanings: 1. Censure, blame, or abusive language aimed at a person or thing, especially by numerous persons or by the general public. 2. Discredit, disgrace, or bad repute resulting from public blame, abuse, or denunciation. The synonyms for obloquy include: 1. Reproach, lies; aspersion, revilement.
Aspersion is a noun meaning: 1. A damaging or derogatory remark or criticism; slander: casting aspersions on a campaign rival. 2. The act of slandering; vilification; defamation; calumniation; derogation: Such vehement aspersions cannot be ignored. 3. The act of sprinkling, as in baptism. Synonyms for aspersion are: 1. Censure and reproach.
Villainous used as an adjective means: 1. Having a cruel, wicked, malicious nature or character. 2. Of, pertaining to, or befitting a villain: villainous treachery. 3. Outrageously base, wicked, or vile: a villainous attack on his character. 4. Very objectionable or unpleasant; bad; wretched: a villainous tornado.
Reprobate when used as a noun means: 1. a depraved, unprincipled, or wicked person: a drunken reprobate. 2. A person rejected by God and beyond hope of salvation. As an adjective: 3. morally depraved; unprincipled; bad. 4. rejected by God and beyond hope of salvation.
5. To disapprove, condemn, or censure. 6. (Of God) to reject (a person), as for sin; exclude from the number of the elect or from salvation. Synonyms that are used for and mean the same as reprobate are: 1. Tramp, scoundrel, (squanderer,) (good for nothing) troublemaker, wretch, rascal, cad, rogue. 2. Outcast, pariah. 3. Wicked, sinful, evil, corrupt. 5. Reprehend, blame, rebuke, reprove.
Miscreant used as an adjective means: 1. depraved, villainous, or base. 2. Outdated. Holding a false or unorthodox religious belief; heretical or infidel. Used as a noun means: 3. a vicious or depraved person; villain.
Despondent used as an adjective means: Feeling or showing profound hopelessness, dejection, discouragement, or gloom: despondent about failing health. Synonyms of despondent are: disheartened, downhearted, melancholy, blue.
Depraved used as an adjective means: Corrupt, wicked, or perverted.
Despairing used as an adjective means: given to despair or hopelessness, indicating despair: a despairing look.
Heinous used as an adjective means: Hateful; odious; abominable; totally reprehensible: a heinous offense. The Synonyms are: wicked, infamous, flagrant, flagitious, atrocious, villainous, and nefarious.
Bad used as a noun; adverb and adjective; look at these meanings: 1. Not good in any manner or degree. 2. Having a wicked or evil character; morally reprehensible. 3. of poor or inferior quality; defective; deficient. 4. Inadequate or below standard; not satisfactory for use. 5. Inaccurate, incorrect, or faulty. 6. Invalid, unsound, or false. 7. Causing or liable to cause sickness or ill health; injurious or harmful. 8. Suffering from sickness, ill health, pain, or injury; sick; ill. 9. Not healthy or in good physical condition; diseased, decayed, or physically weakened. 10. tainted, spoiled, or rotten, especially to the point of being inedible. 11. Having a disastrous or detrimental effect, result, or tendency; unfavorable. 12. Causing or characterized by discomfort, inconvenience, uneasiness, or annoyance; disagreeable; unpleasant. 13. Easily provoked to anger. 14. Cross, irritable, or surly. 15. More uncomfortable, persistent, painful, or dangerous than usual; severe. 16. Causing or resulting in disaster or severe damage or destruction: a bad flood. 17. Regretful, contrite, dejected, or upset: He felt bad about having to leave the children all alone. 18. Disobedient, naughty, or misbehaving: If you’re bad at school, you’ll go to bed without supper. 19. Disreputable or dishonorable: He’s getting a bad name from changing jobs so often. 20. Displaying a lack of skill, talent, proficiency, or judgment: a bad painting; Bad drivers cause most of the accidents. 21. Causing distress; unfortunate or unfavorable. 22. Not suitable or appropriate; disadvantageous or dangerous. 23. Inclement; considered too stormy, hot, cold. 24. Disagreeable or offensive to the senses. 25. Exhibiting a lack of artistic sensitivity. 26. Not in keeping with a standard of behavior or conduct. 27. (Of a word, speech, or writing) vulgar, obscene, or blasphemous, not properly observing rules or customs of grammar, usage, spelling, etc.; incorrect. 28. unattractive, especially because of a lack of pleasing proportions. 29. (Of the complexion) marred by defects; pockmarked or pimply; blemished: bad skin. 30. Not profitable or worth the price paid. 31. Commerce. Deemed uncollectible or irrecoverable and treated as a loss. 32. ill-spent; wasted. 33. counterfeit; not genuine. 34. Having the character of a villain; villainous.
The synonyms of Evil are: Depraved, corrupt, base, sinful, criminal, and atrocious. Bad, evil, ill, wicked are the closest in meaning in reference to that which is lacking in moral qualities or is actually vicious and reprehensible. Evil applies to that which violates or leads to the violation of moral, adverse, unlucky, unhappy, unpleasant, unattractive, unfavorable, and spoiled.
“Who taught you to hate the color of your skin? Who taught you to hate the texture of your hair? Who taught you to hate the shape of your nose and the shape of your lips? Who taught you to hate yourself from the top of your head to the soles of your feet? Who taught you to hate your own kind? Who taught you to hate the race that you belong to so much so that you don’t want to be around each other? No… Before you come asking Mr. Muhammad does he teach hate, you should ask yourself who taught you to hate being what God made you.”—Malcolm X (May 22, 1962, Los Angeles)
Now that you have been given a view of the many words used to corrupt the mind and define a particular group of people including those who come in contact with the English language remember, this was not the entire list of negative words or their combinational force.
State of Black America
Remember as you read this that this information it is four years old but it speaks for itself in a no nonsense way. This is taken from the following author and source: Lottie L. Joiner, “The State of Black Children” Emerge magazine (October 1998) p. 39.
“Black children are in a state of emergency. Of the 10.4 million African-American youth under age 18, 40 percent live in poverty. They make up nearly 50 percent of the foster care system and are disproportionately victims of violence, abuse and neglect.
“Black children are in the worse crisis since slavery,” says Barbara Kelly Duncan, national director of the Children’s Defense Fund’s Black Community Crusade for Children. “When you talk about winning the game, our children aren’t even in the game. They are lacking a sense of community, a sense of support for too many of them, there’s not a sense of hope.”
To underscore the point is a suicide rate among Black males that more than doubled from 1980 to 1995, from 3.6 per 1000 to 8.1 per 1,000.
The deck, however, is stacked against Black children at birth. In 1995, the infant mortality rate for Black babies was 15 percent, more than twice that of White (6.3 percent) ones.
African-Americans age 1 to 4 also had the highest child mortality rate of any ethnic group. And while 75 percent of White children live with both parents, 57 percent of Black children live in single parent homes. Nearly 40 years ago, only 22 percent lived in single-parent homes.”
Behind much of anti-crime rhetoric was a not-too-subtle racial dimension, the projection of crude stereotypes about the link between criminality and Black people. Rarely did these politicians observe that minority and poor people, not the White middle class, were statistically much more likely to experience violent crimes of all kinds. The argument was made that law enforcement officers should be given much greater latitude in suppressing crime, that sentences should be lengthened and made mandatory, and that prisons should be designed not for the purpose of rehabilitation, but for punishment.
Consequently, there was a rapid expansion in the personnel of the criminal justice system, as well as the construction of new prisons. What occurred in New York State, for example, was typical of what happened nationally. From 1817 to 1981, New York had opened 33 state prisons. From 1982 to 1999, another 38 state prisons were constructed. The state’s prison population at the time of the Attica prison revolt in September 1971 was about 12,500. By 1999, there were over 71,000 prisoners in New York State correctional facilities.
In 1974, the number of Americans incarcerated in all state prisons stood at 187,500. By 1991, the number had reached 711,700. Nearly two-thirds of all state prisoners in 1991 had less than a high school education. One third of all prisoners were unemployed at the time of their arrests. Incarceration rates by the end of the 1980s had soared to unprecedented rates, especially for Black Americans. As of December 1989, the total US prison population, including federal institutions, exceeded one million for the first time in history, an incarceration rate of the general population of one out of every 250 citizens.
For African Americans, the rate was over 700 per 100,000, or about seven times more than for Whites. About one half of all prisoners were Black. Twenty-three percent of all Black males in their twenties were either in jail or prison, on parole, probation, or awaiting trial. The rate of incarceration of Black Americans in 1989 had even surpassed that experienced by Blacks who still lived under the apartheid regime of South Africa.
By the early 1990s, rates for all types of violent crime began to plummet. But the laws which sent offenders to prison were made even more severe. Children were increasingly viewed in courts as adults, and subjected to harsher penalties. Laws like California’s “three strikes and you’re out” eliminated the possibility of parole for repeat offenders. The vast majority of these new prisoners were non-violent offenders, and many of these were convicted of drug offenses that carried long prison terms. In New York, a state in which African Americans and Latinos comprise 25% of the total population, by 1999 they represented 83% of all state prisoners, and 94% of all individuals convicted on drug offenses.
The pattern of racial bias in these statistics is confirmed by the research of the US Commission on Civil Rights, which found that while African Americans today constitute only 14% of all drug users nationally, they are 35% of all drug arrests, 55% of all drug convictions, and 75% of all prison admissions for drug offenses. Currently, the racial proportions of those under some type of correctional supervision, including parole and probation, are one-in-fifteen for young White males, one-in-ten for young Latino males, and one-in-three for young African-American males. Statistically today, more than eight out of every ten African-American males will be arrested at some point in their lifetime.
Hopefully you now have a better idea of how that happens to African Americans, their children and their children’s children but follow this: The whole universe, including the universe or kingdom in you is alive with energy and vibrations on many levels. We, as spirit beings living inside these human forms, are beings that, at the smallest, most intimate level of our existence, living vibrations and energy power and potential. That, in my opinion, is who and what we actually are in the universe. You are words, vibrations and emotional energy with unlimited potential to create. That is a powerful combination when focused in the right direction. So you can see now how detrimental it is to have absorbed the negative words relating to Black over time.
Vibrations
A word is an articulated form of something that is written or spoken. Spoken and written words give us a mental picture of what the words describe. Air coming from the lungs is forced up through the vocal cords. The vocal cords vibrate as the air passes through them. Muscles located within the larynx (often referred to as the voice box) control the pitch, high or low, of sound vibrations. These muscles control the expansion and contraction of the vocal cords. The lips, tongue and soft palate control articulation and formation of the sounds into words. The important point here is that we communicate with vibratory sounds. When we receive words from others the sound waves strike the sound-sensitive eardrum. Three small bones, the hammer, anvil and stirrup, move in direct response to the particular sound waves received. This motion is transmitted through fluid in the inner ear, to a group of hair-like cells. Attached to each cell is an auditory nerve fiber, which carries an electrical signal. The brain analyzes all these impulses and produces a mental picture from vibratory sound. In terms of what is happening to African/Americans, Black and Brown people is that we are constantly being programmed through the English language.
There is great vibratory power in words, in fact great enough power to create, through your own words, either a positive or a negative life. Sowing and reaping have more to do with specific thoughts, words and actions planted in the mind, the law of cycles of return has to do with the overall waves of positive and negative energy that we send out into the invisible realms because of our thought processes. These waves of energy will return both with like vibrations and with opposite vibrations or waves of energy.
The principle of reciprocal power reveals that the use of words, vibrations and the power in all of us, when spoken or projected, will create a return in our lives. We live in a universe where there is a reciprocal condition and a relationship whereby energies and vibrations or words that come out of us interchange, interact and return to us. We are rewarded measure for measure and proportionately equal to what we have said and done.
Sometimes in that exchange of energies and vibrations called words, there is an increase in “what comes around.” This may be due in part to the fact that we are working on a reward (consequences). Actions and words in the beginning bring smaller consequences and we may not be aware of the return but, over time, the return is so great we can be overwhelmed by it. Now when you look at Black on Black crime you can see these scientific and spiritual principles at work. Perhaps now you can see why it is so necessary for us to teach our own children. Hopefully, you will understand this: God is reciprocity or Karma. God or the universe is a mirror. When you look at your life, it is a reflection of what you have produced with your life. You reap what you sow, individually or as a community or race.
Sounds, vibrations and mental energy will manifest themselves as a result of the total output of your life. The total of what you produce is released into the invisible energy force that is around you and the returning reality will be manifested over time. If and when you begin to respect and love yourself and others, more of the energy of love, joy and peace begins to be manifested in your life, and then that positive energy is projected onto your surroundings.
Thought is a force of electricity with gravity and power. Its manifestation is the result of a continual working of the dynamics of universal law and principle. Somewhere within you is the spark of the mighty consciousness that you see manifested everywhere outside of yourself. Life is everywhere you look, and that magical, mystical, indescribable essence is both in and around you. And yet, the same rules apply when you have developed a subconscious “hate” for the words related to Black. When you understand this process it is a little easier to see what we as a people are doing to each other.
According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, between 1976 and 2011 there were 279,384 black murder victims. Using the 94 percent figure means that 262,621 were murdered by other Blacks. Though Blacks are 13 percent of the nation’s population, they account for more than 50 percent of homicide victims. Nationally, the Black homicide victimization rate is six times that of whites, and in some cities it’s 22 times that of whites. Coupled with being most of the nation’s homicide victims, blacks are most of the victims of violent personal crimes, such as assault and robbery.
The magnitude of this mayhem can be viewed in another light. According to a Tuskegee Institute study, between the years 1882 and 1968, 3,446 blacks were lynched at the hands of whites. Black fatalities during the Korean War (3,075), Vietnam War (7,243) and all wars since 1980 (8,197) come to 18,515, a number that pales in comparison with black loss of life at home. It’s a tragic commentary to be able to say that young black males have a greater chance of reaching maturity on the battlefields of Iraq and Afghanistan than on the streets of Philadelphia, Chicago, LA, Detroit, Oakland, Newark and other cities.
Whatever the powerful mind conceives, excluding any opposing thought and holding that constant, pure thought and believing it with intensity, it will instantly begin to come to pass on a subatomic level. You are in a constant flow of reality and constant state of manifestation. Your life is an unfolding discovery and revelation of your deepest thoughts. When you trace your life back into your past, where you are today is a result of your continual thinking and action toward the manifestation and exposure of your inner self. The real representation of who you are is all around you.
The expression of your essence is staring you in the face. If you are unhappy with the final product, then you must change the production and projection of your inner being. That is, you must change your thoughts. You must confront the reality that you have created so that you can see plainly that the evidence of your manifested self—is you. And no one can change you. Neither money nor even relocation to another place can change you because wherever you take yourself, you will still meet you. Only you can change you. Hopefully, now you will see how important it is for you to read study and know your own history so you can develop a positive self image not the negative one that was created for you and in you.
How does a Black child view the world as they grow and search for understanding the world they live in? There is television that portrays a reality to the mind of a child. In most cases the images follow the pattern of the words we have just looked at. Personally speaking, I remember when almost all cartoon characters who were bad had to be some kind of color. They were not always Black but just some other color than White. Television conveys the images and standards of what is beautiful and what is less desirable. In the case of more Black images on television these days, the images must be seen as using the words that support negative influences. Therefore even if they are beautiful and well dressed with jewelry etc., they must follow the language prescribed in the dictionary definitions of them. In other words they look successful but the character issues and conversation remain at a low level of social development, the cussing, the overt sexual dress and conversation, can’t get along, can’t find common ground, men can’t get along with women, etc. etc. This is the negative image that is projected because Black people have bought into this cultural re-direction through the dictionary ideas about Black, it has now become the norm and how dare anyone question that negative reality including those who engage in the behavior.
Now every image is not bad, you must have positive images as window dressing and examples of following the rules of right behavior to pacify those advocating civil liberties. And, I do not want to leave out those who respond in positive ways to create and display positive characters because they believe in lifting the character images of all persons regardless of race. But despite those who strive to do the right thing, television promotes Whiteness as the over arching standard of beauty, power, goodness, privilege and opportunity.
All these images are superimposed on a growing child’s mind and absorbed into the subconscious for instant retrieval when needed to reinforce the child’s self image, even though the innocent child does not have any defense against this. There is a defense and this can come from an intervention from another authority figure or positive social influence. If another person or social institution teaches Black children self-respect and accountability for their personal actions along with a sense of needing high academic accomplishment, they then will tend to grow and become self-respecting, accountable, and good students. That will remain true unless this process is interrupted by another social factor. In the Black community generally there are three major influences in the Black child’s life, the family, the Church and the street.
Magazines play a role in the development of a child’s mind. While there are many more culturally specific magazines with regard to the Black experience there are other children’s books, magazines in doctors’ offices and other places that children are exposed to. These magazines all follow the prescribed social norms set up by the dictionary descriptions and are played out throughout the stories and pictures.
Let’s look at the home life, the parents and the relatives that surround and influence the child. Keep in mind the list of cultural norms that are used in the language reality on a continual basis previously mentioned. When you take into account the child’s language environment through parents and relatives the following things possibly happen: The parents or relatives use culturally explosive language around and at the child. “You have nappy hair.” “This child is lighter than her brother.” “This child is so Black.” “You are just like yo no good Father or Mother that Black Ni___r.” “You are bad.” Don’t drink coffee because it will make you Black. Statements like this are more common than you might think, especially in houses where there is low self esteem in the parents or relatives, especially if there are other compounding issues, financial, poor housing and crowded ill equipped teachers, schools and possible substance abuse. Children hear these words and phrases before they know what they mean because in many families these are common words and language used on a daily basis. Later, children understand on a subconscious level, ok that is what I am Black, bad and I have nick names like spook, spot and inky.
In some families this does not happen. I cannot remember my parents ever using those terms. However, we as children in the community did somehow learn those and other words and used them to insult each other. And, boy if you called someone a Black African, you had better be ready to fight. How that happened I cannot remember but I do remember Tarzan and all the Black natives. I remember King Kong with all the Black natives. I remember the big Black pots with White people in them being boiled with Black natives looking on with delight. I remember the cartoons with all the Black natives running around in the jungle repeated over and over again. I remember Moses played by Charlton Heston. I remember Cleopatra, played by Elizabeth Taylor. I remember the Ten Commandments that we watched every year around Christmas. And, I also believe you absorb bits of information that form your personal psychology, (the way you see everything) through all the language and through the various educational methods under discussion in this chapter.
I do remember, upon reflection years later, crayons with “flesh color,” markings on them and all the books had White people in them. As a matter of fact I do not remember seeing any positive information about Black people until the 5th grade when I was taught that we were slaves and I became ashamed of myself to the extent that I remember always sitting with my hand over the lower part of my face. The only exception to negative information about us as a people was a study about George Washington Carver who was an American scientist, botanist, educator, and inventor. Still even his roots were from slavery. The general idea taught through omission is that we had contributed nothing on the world’s stage of historical events. The words are interwoven into the general conversation of the English language: God and angels are pictured everywhere as White; you get married in White you wear Black at a funeral, Black cats are bad, Black sheep of the family, Black magic vs. White magic, if you are Black, stay back, brown, stick around, yellow, you are mellow, White you are alright, nappy hair is bad hair, good guys where White hats, Black eye, Black mark, behind the eight ball, pot calling the kettle Black, angel food cake is White Devil’s food cake is Black, White pieces move first in chess, the only Brown money is the lowest and has Lincoln on it, who supposedly freed the slaves. It is in the language and we program each other with these words and phrases becoming part of our personal psychology.
As a result of Black children begin exposed in school and growing up in an environment that creates his or her mindset when they grow up it shows up in dysfunctional ways. Adults shamed as children may suffer extreme shyness, embarrassment and feelings of being inferior to others. They don’t believe they make mistakes. Instead they believe they are mistakes. They fear intimacy and tend to avoid real commitment in relationships. They feel that, “No matter what I do, it won’t make a difference; I am and always will be worthless and unlovable.” Now as adults they frequently feel defensive when even minor negative feedback is given. They suffer feelings of severe humiliation if forced to look at mistakes or imperfections. They frequently blame others before they can be blamed.
Adults shamed as children project their beliefs about themselves onto others. Adults shamed as children often feel ugly, flawed and imperfect. These feelings regarding self may lead to focus on clothing and makeup in an attempt to hide flaws in personal appearance and self. Adults shamed as children block their feelings of shame through compulsive behaviors like workaholic, eating disorders, shopping, and substance abuse, or gambling.
Not too many years ago I was instructing students in a High School about alcohol, drugs and criminal behavior. I taught the whole day to each class of students that was brought in every hour. After the classes were over, I remember asking the teacher were there any images of African American people in the classroom. I previously had noticed that all around the room there were positive images of White people, high up where you could not miss them. The teacher promptly said to me that, “Oh yes, we have Black history month and we use positive images.” She immediately went over to a corner in the front of the room where the whole display was covered up by other material. She had to move it to show me the display. We entered a dialog about positive images and why a more even display of positive images were not available to the Black students? I was not invited back. A few years later my supervisor said to me, I wonder what happened, we have been invited every year to go to that school. I told him what happened. I do not remember him saying anything about it; I just remember a curious look came over his face. The reality of being Black in White America is lost on White people. They do not have a clue for the most part. That is not to say there are not well meaning and understanding White people, because there are!
Ancient Egypt
Ancient Egypt was the center of learning where intellectuals from all over the world traveled to study mathematics, astronomy, medicine, literature and other subjects. The Greeks, whose civilization developed at least two thousand years after that of Egypt, traveled in large number to Egypt to learn the wisdom of the Egyptians.
The ancient Mesopotamian civilizations never moved far beyond the early view that immortality was reserved for the gods, and that life after death, if it existed at all, was a gloomy and terrible existence in which spirits haunted the world in a continual search for food and water. They did not come to believe in divine rewards for moral conduct. Unlike the Egyptians who believed in life after death, they did not develop an expectation of an attractive life after death as a reward for good behavior on earth just like you find in the New Testament written over four thousand years later. Since these people lived at similar latitude to early Mesopotamian peoples such as the Sumerians, it is reasonable to conclude that the early Mesopotamians themselves were also Black, since they would have experienced similar amounts of UV rays. Genetic data, combined with history, also implies a Black origin of Mesopotamians that according to Heather L. Norton and Rick A. Kittles.
Building on the work of the Black Sumerians, the Black Babylonians made advances in arithmetic, geometry, and algebra. In working with both whole numbers and fractions, they compiled tables for multiplication and division and for square and cube roots. Black Babylonians knew how to solve linear and quadratic equations and their knowledge of geometry included the theorem later formulated by the Greek philosopher Pythagoras: the square of the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides. Now I found this in a more recent College History book. And while Egyptians have mastered most of what I just sited you do not find in the same History book any references to their mathematical abilities. Also, there is no mention of the color of Sumerians, Babylonians and Egyptians. These are lies by omission. That is why I go to great lengths to show the Black man’s contribution to the story of man. Once again a Greek who is given credit for discovering something was found already developed among people of color. If you are Black you ought to be proud. If you are White you ought to have a new found respect for members of the Black race.
And yet: Through a very sophisticated propaganda apparatus (press and education), Europeans have portrayed, projected and propagated that:
(1) The ancient Egyptians who created the first civilization in the history of mankind were White; or non-Black (National Geographic)
(2) The White race is here to rule all dark races in the world because the White race is the only race that is capable of civilization;
(3) African people have not contributed to civilization of humanity because they are backward, low in intelligence and culture;
(4) African people have no worthwhile history to point to with pride;
(5) African people cannot take control of their own destiny and therefore, must be directed and controlled;
(6) African people are innately inferior beings, irrational, emotional, have a lower intelligence, and therefore, are incapable of acting upon, transforming, and developing their own natural environment.
During the Jim Crow era of the South during the 1940s in the United States of America, be assured that any of the Pharaoh’s of Egypt, especially up to and including the ruling Nubian Pharaohs of the 25th Dynasty, would have been required to sit at the back of the bus.
Continuous Cover-ups
Another tactic used was when Black contributions to modern civilization are so obvious and can’t be denied and your best schemes can’t hide it, find a way to attribute the success to outside European and White influence. When all the ancient historians contradict your theory, seek to discredit those historians, especially if they are Black.
It is too often forgotten and not a part of our conscious thinking process to remember that when the Europeans emerged and began to extend themselves into the broader world of Africa and Asia during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, they went on to claim power over most of the people of color. Later they would colonize world scholarship, mainly the writing of history. History was then written or rewritten to show or imply that Europeans were the only creators of what could be called a civilization. In order to accomplish this, the Europeans had to obscure, create doubt and write out of history all that was previously known about Africa.
A knowledge of one’s ancestors has psychological value, especially if your ancestors were worthy of world wide praise for their numerous accomplishments. Particularly for the youth, this would be an inspiration. Lies must be met with truth and facts; not beliefs and feelings.
It is now perfectly clear that such a devious undertaking took place and and continues to this day, in order to obscure, bury and hide what is actually the very powerful foundations of modern civilizations. If African history was of little or no significance why lie and hide it? The prime significance of African history becomes still more apparent when it is realized that this deliberate denial of African history arose out of the European expansion and invasion of Africa which began in the middle of the fifteenth century.
The necessity to lie and cover up the truth was thereby born out of an attempt to justify European conquest, domination, enslavement, and plunder. This brash denial of history and culture of Africa, even of human qualities and capacity for civilization of the indigenous peoples of Africa is a tragedy. This book seeks to correct in part, the negative view you may have of Africa.
In every country that one visits and where one is drawn into a conversation about Africa, the question is regularly asked, by people who should know better: what has Africa contributed to world progress? The critics of Africa forget that men of science today are, with few exceptions, satisfied and convinced that Africa, namely Ethiopia is the birthplace of man himself, and that for many hundreds of centuries thereafter, Africa was in the forefront of all world progress. The civilization of Egypt lasted longer than any other civilization known to man—about 10,000 years. This civilization reached its height and was in decline before Europe was even born. When this kind of information is brought forward it reshapes the mind and raises questions. For example, I had a White person call me a “boy” in a very condescending way. I told him, “Anthropologically speaking, I… am your Daddy.”
Europeans, White people have been running the planet for the last two thousand years. In effect, White people have been running things since they invaded Africa. We need to face the fact, that we have been subjugated to a ruling power in this world.
To one degree or another we have been repeating or forced to repeat the same behavior for over 400 years in America. Even with the election of President Barak Obama as the first modern Black President of the United States. But, his election has not changed the lives of Black people in America unless you use his example to strive for excellence. Face it; a Black man in a White man’s house is not going to directly affect us. He is subject to all the rules that were set up for him to obey before he was born. His election is fine when it comes to political arguments but his being the President does not affect nor change what the real problems are for African Americans. He cannot address that as a separate issue lest he be deemed a racist.
What we need as Black people is unity. Everyone else, every other group of people have that but us. We seem to specialize in fighting against our own best interests and stand by while every other group uses their unity to set up businesses in our communities and bring our wealth out of the community to theirs. We just cannot seem to put our Blackness first the way Whites, Yellows and others do without shame or explanation. For them it is natural to come together. We as Black people will never gain power by continually repeating this behavior. In fact everyone who comes to this country sets up a business in the Black community. All because they are unified and we are not. They sell us everything we need and many times what we do not need for our communities; we buy and do not produce.
White people come together to benefit themselves. They feel it is natural and that there is nothing racist about that. We make the mistake of trying to love everyone else except ourselves and you cannot love and respect anyone until you love and respect yourself and it is evident that we do not. Our thinking, action, behavior and resulting consequences are producing what we see in the news paper every day. While we have been jumping up and down being emotional and spiritual focused on being good to go to heaven, White people continue to gain power in the World.
After unity comes organization. White people have used a strategy to take over the world. Since they are a minority of the world’s population, they organized an army and began to conquer the darker people of the world. They kill men, women, and children old and young without concern using brute force. The goal has been conquest. Whatever they feel they need they just take it, natural resources, whatever “it” is they just take it. Then they make the rules so others must obey their rules. And if Native Americans or Blacks did not like it, well that is just too bad. Remember they feel there are no rules in war. Their objective is to ensure survival, domination and conquest.
We Black people seem to feel all the social injustice and high incarceration rates just happened. The real truth is that there are people who intend to keep us right where we are, on the plantation. They have been working at this for over four hundred years and they have no intention of changing what works for them and subjugates us.
White people know, understand and discuss something we will not see no matter what the promises of equality say. They rode the greatest wealth builder in human history to obtain their position of power; our free labor. With all of that money they were able to finance the industrial revolution and create wealth. And, they intend to keep things just the way they are with regard to their wealth and their ability to exploit us and our talents to serve their interests, and why would you expect them to do anything different?
The philosophy and ethics resulting from our educational system have justified slavery, peonage, segregation, and lynching. The oppressor has the right to exploit, to handicap, and to kill the oppressed.
No systematic effort toward change has been possible, for, we are taught the same economics, history, philosophy, literature and religion which has established the present code of morals and the Negro’s mind has been brought under the control of his oppressor. The problem of holding the Negro down, therefore, is easily solved. When you control a man’s thinking you do not have to worry about his actions. You do not have to tell him not to stand here or go yonder. He will find his “proper place” and will stay in it. You do not need to send him to the back door. He will go without being told. In fact, if there is no back door, he will cut one for his special benefit. His education makes it necessary.
The same educational process which inspires and stimulates the oppressor with the thought that he is everything and has accomplished everything worthwhile, depresses and crushes at the same time the spark of genius in the Negro by making him feel that his race does not amount to much and never will measure up to the standards of other peoples. The Negro thus educated is a hopeless liability of the race. The difficulty is that the “educated Negro” is compelled to live and move among his own people whom he has been taught to despise. As a rule, therefore, the “educated Negro” prefers to buy his food from a White grocer because he has been taught that the Negro is not clean. We are taught to admire the Hebrew, the Greek, the Latin and the Tetons (German) and to despise the African.
Woodson pointed out that even schools for Negroes, were places where Negroes must be convinced of their inferiority. The thought of the inferiority of the Negro is drilled into him in almost every class he enters, he noted and in almost every book he studies his mind is guided. To handicap a student by teaching him that his Black face is a curse and that his struggle to change his condition is hopeless is the worst sort of mental lynching. It kills one’s aspirations and is designed to doom him to vagabondage and crime. It is strange, then, that the friends of truth and the promoters of freedom have not risen up against the present propaganda in the schools and crushed it even to this day. This crusade is much more important than the anti-lynching movement, because there would be no lynching if it did not start in the schoolroom. Paraphrased from the great work, Carter Godwin Woodson, The Mis-Education of the Negro 1933
Cultural continuity as presented by Doctor Amos Wilson is maintained by educating children in the ways of their culture. And they are educated in the ways of their culture to MAINTAIN their culture, to advance its interests, and ultimately to try to maintain its very survival. That is the fundamental reason people are educated. What does it matter if you learn physics and computer science and everything else and you cannot defend yourself against a military assault by Europeans or a germ warfare assault? A knowledge of computer science, a knowledge of law, a knowledge of all of these other things matters not at all if you are unable to use that knowledge for yourself defense. If Bush decided to wipe the face of this earth clean of African people there’s not an African nation that could defend us against these people. Wilson went on to say, and as long as we are not educated to defend ourselves against these people then we are being incorrectly educated. Nothing else matters. Ultimately then, intelligence must be defined in terms of the degree in which it solves YOUR PROBLEMS, African American problems. The nature of education today prepares you to solve THEIR PROBLEMS, European problems and not your own. That’s why you study THEIR books, you go to THEIR schools, you learn THEIR information, THEIR language, THEIR styles, THEIR perceptions, so when you come out of school you can do a humdinger of a job solving European’s problems, but you can’t solve your own. And then you DARE call yourself “intelligent?” C’mon. That’s the height of stupidity.” Paraphrased from Dr. Amos Wilson
Europeans began changing the image and the mental view regarding the origin of Egypt’s African civilization and the race of the people who founded that civilization in order to provide the rationale and justification for the slave trade and its horrific de-humanization of African people. The strategy was to deny ancient Egyptian’s African identity, so that they could deny Africans any abilities to build a civilization. This was done by colonizing the information about the ancient Egyptian history. By colonizing the information about the achievements of Africans in ancient world, they began to project a picture of themselves as the only race that has been responsible for civilization, culture and progress. No wonder African American children grow up today not believing that they can create a thriving community.
With a negative picture of the Africans they hoped to oppress us and convince us that we deserved and continue to deserve to be oppressed because we had not contributed to the civilization of humanity, thus the need to be civilized.
But listen: The first and greatest civilizations designed by humans were the inventions of the Black man. The genius and creativity of Black people go back to the dawn of human history.
Has anybody ever said you couldn’t be a scientist, engineer, or the author of books? Your ancestors were the first to invent science, engineering, and writing. Blacks were also the first to discover medicine, architecture, astronomy, engineering, agriculture, banking systems, and much more.
Instead of being a debtor to humanity, Black people are the foundation, the very spring, from which civilization as we know it today has flowed.
In his book Jews and Judaism in African History, Richard Hull points out that the trade in African slaves, which was started by the Portuguese, was sanctioned by the Pope of Rome when Papal bulls or edicts had full power over the entire Catholic world. In about 1452, Pope Nicholas V permitted the Portuguese to enslave “enemies of Christ” and infidels, as though Jesus would permit such an evil. This Papal bull also proclaimed that in the name of Christianity, “pagans” could be expelled from their own land, brought to Europe and placed under perpetual servitude.
So the Pope, under the influence of the Jewish-inspired myth of the “cursed children of Ham” and the Roman Catholic Church under the authority of the Pope that portrayed Jesus as a White man, used his religious authority to put Black people in a state of perpetual slavery based on the color of their skin.
It was the Vatican, as the seat of the Catholic Church, which hired Leonardo Da Vinci and Michelangelo to make new images of Jesus, Mary and God in the likeness of White people. Now, don’t get upset. These are facts. If you are having an emotional reaction to these facts you should try and find out why? Why are you upset about these facts? Are you upset with me for putting this information on paper? If you are upset, why are you upset? What are your feelings? Fear? Anger? Doubt?
It was Pope Julius II who commissioned Michelangelo to paint these White images on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. Prior to Michelangelo, images of Mary and Jesus as the Madonna and Child were invariably depicted with Black skin. Today Black Madonna’s still exist in over 140 churches throughout Europe. One of the most famous is The Black Madonna of Czestochowa, housed since 1382 at the Jasna Góra Monastery in Czestochowa, Poland.
Jesus could not have been the pale-skinned, blue-eyed figure portrayed in such art. If Jesus were White, it would not matter to Black people, because we are trying to follow his teachings and not his skin color. But, with the Pope of Rome sentencing all Black-skinned people to a state of perpetual servitude as though it were divinely ordained, it was therefore, White people who made an issue of skin color and enshrined White as being supreme all around the world. Now those are the facts. Those are historical facts. It does not mean that I hate White people or the White race. Hating anyone is counterproductive to advancing better ideas.
The Catholic Church decrees that Jesus was a Jew by birth, yet it denies the likelihood that he was also Egyptian. Catholic scholars know without a doubt that a large segment of the Jewish people came out of North Africa. There are three major ethnic divisions within the Jewish world: There are the Ashkenazim or “Germanic” Jews of Germany and Eastern Europe; Sephardic Jews from Spain and Portugal; and Mizrahim the Middle Eastern and North African Jews.
Within the past few years, extensive research has been done on the Lemba communities in Africa. These tests verify that many male “Black Jews” have the same genetic structure as the priests, providing evidence of the relation to Jews of this ancient people. So, you have approximately 2,500 years ago, after the destruction of the Temple, a group of Jews who left Judea and settled in Yemen. When the economic situation in Yemen began to fail, the Jews left and moved to Africa; with one group settling in Ethiopia and the other in Tanzania. After several years, many Jews left Ethiopia and moved further south into what today is Zimbabwe. They became known as the Ba-Lemba. The Lemba people have the strongest DNA ties to the original tribe of the Levite Priests. Yes Black people in Africa have the strongest ties to Israel.
The African Falasha tradition claims to trace their ancestry to Menelik, son of King Solomon of Israel and the queen of Sheba. Some scholars place the date of their origin before the 2d century BC. The Bible of the Falashas is written in an archaic Semitic dialect, known as Ethiopic, and the Hebrew Scriptures are unknown to them. The name Falasha is Amharic for “exiles” or “landless ones”; the Falashas themselves refer to their sect as Beta Esrael (“House of Israel”). These may be part of the lost 10 tribes of Israel. Why else would they call themselves, “The House of Israel?”
The European Jews we see now in Israel are just that, European Jews. During the Crusades this group of Europeans could not remain Islamic when the Crusaders were winning and could not be Christian when the Islamic groups were in power. So, they converted to Judaism. Judaism or being Jewish is a religion; it is NOT an ethnic group of people. That is why Sammy Davis Jr. could become a Jew.
Growing up I thought all the Jews I went to school with were the real Jews of the Bible. I did not find out until much later that they are Europeans. I did wonder how all of those White appearing people were in the midst of all those Brown people of that area of the world, but “tel lie vision” had convinced me Jews were white. I am willing to bet most Christians believe these groups of people are the people of the Bible. Nothing could be further from the truth.
How does God describe Himself
in the Bible
God Himself has kinky, nappy hair—according to the Bible, where God or the “Ancient of Days” is described as having “hair like the pure wool.” (Dan. 7:9)
Da 7:9 I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was White as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire.
The Bible said he who is called the “Lamb” of God, has kinky hair and is compared with lamb’s wool, feet the color of burnt brass (Rev. 1:14, 15)
In the Book of Daniel, it says the hair of the Messiah’s head would be “like the pure wool” of a lamb and the Book of Revelation likens the prophetic Jesus’ feet to “fine brass, as if burned in a furnace.” If you burn brass, it turns black!
Ac 21:38 (Paul) Art not thou that Egyptian, which before these days madest an uproar, and leddest out into the wilderness four thousand men that were murderers?
According to the Bible, when Herod was seeking the life of the child Jesus, Mary and Joseph were instructed by an angel to flee to Egypt, not Europe or Asia, and told to stay there until Herod died. At the time of Jesus, the Romans had control of both Palestine and Egypt, so why would Egypt (Africa) be a safe place for them, unless they could easily blend in with the native population?
Mt 2:12 And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way.
Mt 2:13 And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.
The influence that causes galaxies to spiral, and planets and atoms to spin; that causes the double helix spiral of the DNA molecules—this same spiraling power causes spiraling hair… otherwise known as nappy, kinky, curly, frizzy, wavy, woolly hair!
This spiraling is called Phi (golden mean)—“The key to the physics of the cosmos” according to Plato. Plato lived among Egyptian Priests for 13 years reading Geometry and theology. Euclid learned mathematics in Egypt before applying them elsewhere. The pyramids and temples of the Nile were not built by guesswork or rule of thumb. They were built by the use of mathematical certainties which the Egyptians had discovered and proven.
Phi is a constant value which is even more mysterious and profound in its implications than pi. Like pi, phi is a number with no arithmetical solution. The decimals just keep on going into infinity without ever repeating themselves. The unique thing about this number is that it can be found incorporated in all known organic structures. From the bone structure of human beings to the seed pattern of a sunflower to the spiral of a sea shell, the phi proportion is there, underlying all biological structures, seeming to be a geometrical blueprint for life itself.
The Black Egyptians, as another example of their mathematical genius, used it to pattern the construction of the Pyramids. Of course its discovery is credited to Europeans as you can see in other statements of history such as the following: Pythagoras, a mathematical cult leader in the 5th century B.C. was credited with its discovery of the golden mean along with Leonardo Fibonacci In the 12th century, who discovered a simple numerical series that is the foundation for an incredible mathematical relationship behind phi. Later to be called the Fibonacci numbers.
The words, spin, spiral, and spiritual have common roots! The highest Power spins; spirals; it is spiritual. It moves or spirals the universe! The whole universe dances in spirals and rotations; everything in it reflects the spiraling, spiritual essence out of which it is made! The spiral, especially the Golden Spiral, is at the same time the most profound movement and blueprint in the universe—built into all life forms, from seashells to man, to spiraling nappy hair! Your blood spirals through your veins! Plants spiral up from the soil! And nappy hair spirals out from the hair roots! Straight-haired people also have a spiral on their heads, visible as a whorl pattern with its center in the back of the head, where their straight hair grows out slanting in the whorl’s direction. Wooly haired people have both, the whorl pattern and the individually spiraling strands of helixes, coiled, spring-like, nappy hair… the choice of the gods!
When you look into the heavens what do you see? You see blackness, everywhere you look, blackness punctuated by stars and galaxies but mainly blackness. The Amen, the hidden one of the blackness and he made you first.
Dinknesh
Looking into the past, Europeans have claimed the authority to use language as they saw fit to pull the wool over the eyes of the rest of the humanity. Read the following carefully so that you can understand what happens when another group of people define and describe you.
An international team of scientists working in Africa’s Ethiopian Afar Depression announced the discovery of hominid fossils that belong to the oldest human ancestor ever found. The fossils which date back between 5.2 and 5.8 million years ago are extremely significant because they indicate that the ancestors of present-day humans are Black Africans. The specimens are recognizable as early hominids because some of their teeth characteristics are shared exclusively with later hominids. In addition, the bones have a distinctive feature found only in primates that walk upright on two feet. Imagine that, Black people are 5.2 to 5.8 million years old. That means that we are an ancient people. We have been here long before any White person walked the face of the earth.
What you are not told and is not part of the general information flow is that the first of the eleven specimens which included a jawbone, several hand and foot bones, arm bone fragments and a partial collar bone was discovered in December 1997 by Yohannes Haile-Selassie, an Ethiopian doctoral candidate in paleontology at the University of California at Berkeley. Haile-Selassie found the jawbone with teeth while working in Ethiopia’s Middle Awash area, approximately 140 miles northeast of Addis Ababa. The area is about 50 miles south of Hadar, where the 3.2 million year-old “Dinknesh” or “Lucy” skeleton was located, which was previously believed to be the oldest human fossils ever found. Dinknesh—literally “you are lovely” or “you are beautiful”—is now the first woman in Ethiopian history, indeed in the history of the world. Now take a look at how that was turned around. The bones were found by and Ethiopian African who named the bones Dinknesh which means you are lovely or you are beautiful and then Europeans changed the name of the bones based on a song by the Beetles and now the original Paleontological research that has been conducted in the Middle Awash study area since 1981 under the direction of an international team of scientists is looked at through a White view of the world in which they create in the minds of others that they are superior in anthropology and research.
As a member of the Middle Awash project (1993-2007), Haile-Selassie has discovered some of the most important hominid fossils known to science. Yohannes Haile-Selassie is a highly educated, well qualified and skilled anthropologist with an impressive background. Here are some of his accomplishments educationally, B.A., history, The Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; M.A., anthropology, The University of California, Berkeley; Ph.D., integrative biology at The University of California, Berkeley and yet you hear little about him because the original find was renamed, “Lucy.” That western name automatically shifts your mind into believing that once again it is White people who are the scientists and the explorers and authorities on history.
The “urban legion,” that Black people will be a minority in heaven blows up on the face of facts because we have been here for millions of years before White people showed up on the planet. And, do not think for one moment that God did not deal with His creation from the beginning, namely Black Africans. The notion that God waited until just 6 thousand years ago to “write” a book called the Bible, called by many today as His Word, is dwarfed by the written and scientific investigation of reality involving other ancient cultures, mainly Africans and the people of Kemet. I do not deny that God can be found by seeking Him with your whole heart following the inspirational messages found in the Bibles pages, I just assert that other cultures and people found God before that, well before that. Armed with a correct view of history changes your perspective and how you view Black people, Europeans and White people.
The Danger
The danger created by the misuse of Christianity with its violent history and its succeeding influence on nearly two billion people every day is frightening. While the hatred generated in other cultures and religious belief systems by these Christian belief systems of exclusivity and declaration that this is the “only” way to heaven remains the greatest threat to humankind’s continued existence. In the past 2000 years, Christianity has been guilty of initiating several wars and crusades resulting in millions if not billions of needless deaths, rapes, mutilations, tortures, financial rape and blatantly oppressing women to the point of worthlessness, abhorrently justifying the enslavement of Africans and perpetuating cruelties upon them which Europeans would rather just forget. In the name of Christianity so called Holy men, shamelessly driving its followers to hang or burn alleged witches, nearly exterminating the entire Native American population, and inconspicuously under the guise and mantle of the ministry, robbing billions of people of their wealth, resources and national potential and those are the facts. This approach reminds me of a movie, “Mars Attacks,” in which the Martians were chanting, “we come in peace,” while at the same time mowing down people with their ray guns.
Exactly who and what group of people decided for you that Christianity was true while Islam, Buddhism, and Hinduism were demonstrably false, that everyone in the world who does not believe that Jesus is the son of God is destined to hell forever; and how did this group of individuals make these determinations? Yet, you do not hear one Christian minister claim that the Jews in Israel are going to hell because they do not believe in Jesus. No they support Israel to the fullest. I am not trying to say that the Bible is not useful as a book of inspiration but, if you undertake an honest, dispassionate, and emotionless analysis of the Bible, you can easily conclude that it’s not the word of a supreme being it is the words of men that you have been taught to believe are the words of God.
Contrary to what many Christians would like the world to believe, certain facts about the numerous mistakes in the books called the Bible prove that the Bible just can’t just be absolute truth. You can say you believe it with all your heart and that may be true since you have been taught you have to believe it from the beginning of your acceptance of it. But if you’ve ever taken the time to read the Old Testament or to think about what you have read in its entirety, you’ve probably noticed that God was consistently angry and vengeful for what appear to be petty reasons.
By the dawn of the Middle Ages, followers of Christianity, Buddhism, and Hinduism had long established their respective belief systems as the dominant world religions. However, Christianity was the only one of the three that often resorted to violent tactics of conquest and conversion. Its only competitor in crime would be Islam.
The idea of Manifest Destiny, the popular belief that the Judeo-Christian god wanted Americans to rule the continent and firmly impart their ideologies to others, spread quickly in the 1840s. Because of this misguided belief, Christian Americans murdered large numbers of native inhabitants and started wars with Mexico, the region formerly held by Spain. To this day, Protestant Christianity dominates the land above the US/Mexico border, while Roman Catholicism is dominant in the regions to the south. Africa is now a balanced mixture of Islam and Christianity.
It is possible to create a belief system in a person’s mind, intentionally or not, using a series of simple manipulative procedures and steps. The necessary stages for such conditioning are exhausting the subject, (saying it over and over again), getting the subject to admit that the current system of support, whatever that is, isn’t perfect in some way, (sinful) removing the subject’s mental support system, introducing the subject to a new support belief system of thought, explaining the consequences of not accepting the new support system, (going to hell), keeping the subject isolated from other religious support systems and ideas, explaining the urgency of accepting the new support system, offering a reward for accepting the new support system, (eternal life and salvation) and maintaining the subject’s new support system for the length of time desired, (forever). The first three steps are part of the purification phase. However, no refining is necessary if there’s no conflicting information already present within the subject’s beliefs. Thus, there is no need to reprogram a young child or remove an existing support system to install the new one. These methods aren’t fantasy; they’re science.
When children are at a very young age, their parents unknowingly initiate the conditioning process by informing them that everyone is imperfect. Because they’re not perfect, they must take a role model who seemingly defines perfection: Jesus Christ. By turning their lives over to Jesus, they receive forgiveness for their imperfections and inadequacies. Next, parents must make their children fear the consequences of remaining alone with their imperfections. As a result, they are convinced that Hell is the ultimate destination for people who don’t rely on the support system. In this place called Hell, those who choose not to accept Jesus will burn in perpetual agony. Since the consequences of not accepting the support system are so horrific, and the steps necessary to eliminate the consequence are so simplistic, children will learn to adopt these beliefs if only to keep a distance from the supposed punishment. By this point, children certainly become willing to follow those who know this system best.
To continue the conditioning process, parents must successfully keep their children free from the possible external contradicting influences of other belief systems by encompassing them within a Christian environment in a Christian country with weekly Christian “tune up” in Church. Other religions would obviously present conflicting information and weaken their bonds with Jesus Christ, the head of the support system. The other religions would also illustrate the contradictions and consequential uncertainties shared amongst all beliefs. This mental havoc would also create cognitive dissonance, (emotional disturbances when faced with facts that do not support the belief system). The tendency driven by uncomfortable feelings then becomes to repel or justify contradictory information, before there is enough conditioning to stabilize the new belief.
This process usually begins at a tender age, children characteristically aren’t able to rationalize these assertions or challenge their legitimacy, especially when the belief system is backed up by spiritual experiences, preaching and testimonies. Just the opposite, children usually trust their parents and role models and the feelings generated from the collective group. As time goes by, the vast Christian collective surroundings again and again pounds the imperative system into their heads day after day, week after week, month after month, and year after year. By their teenage years, most Christians couldn’t possibly consider the presence of an error in the Bible, because it’s unquestionably the perfect word of God to them. They believe this notion because they’re lifelong members of a society that has continually reinforced the “special” nature of Christianity. So, the belief becomes, “The Bible is the word of God.” Since God wrote the Bible, we know that it contains only truthful accounts. Since the truthful accounts are inspired by God, we know that the Bible is God’s word.” In other words, the Bible is the word of God because the Bible says so regardless of some of the following examples:
The “fountains of the deep” in Genesis 7:11 In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened contain only 1% of the necessary water to flood the entire planet, 99% would have to fall from the supposed sky ocean’ (windows of heaven). Thus, the goal of covering every mountain with only forty days’ worth of precipitation would require a rainfall of six inches per minute, which is far too tremendous for the primitive ark to remain intact. A boat of that size made of gopher wood and pitch could not withstand the forces of the storm necessary to create a worldwide flood. By contrast, we would typically expect a rainfall of only six inches per hour from a category five hurricane. I know the first thing a Christian will say is God did it. Or, can’t God do anything?
Prior to the American Civil War, slaveholders worldwide used many of the passages from the Bible to justify their nightmarish treatment of kidnapped Africans. The orders supposedly given by God are clear enough. When European dominated society taught Black individuals from birth that the Bible is infallible, even when it drastically varies from their own understanding, many slaveholders would force the slaves into to the presumably superior knowledge held by the higher power of the Bible. In other words, if they felt a twinge of guilt they could “believe” that God wanted Blacks to be slaves because the Bible says so. We’d like to pretend that these passages couldn’t be found in the Bible, even so, that won’t make those scriptures go away. Again, the church often neglects the Old Testament due to the uneasy feelings that its controversial topics, such as slavery, create.
Remember the Bible is called the word of God: When Noah finds out about the seemingly harmless incident, he curses Ham’s son, Canaan, and orders him to be a slave to his two uncles. On this day, slavery is supposedly born (Genesis 9:20-27). Thus, the origin of slavery arises from a single young man whose father made the “mistake” of seeing his father in the nude.
Also, in pre-Civil War America, slaveholders often speculated that the descendants of Ham and the cursed Canaan eventually ended up deep into Africa. For this reason, they deemed the kidnapping of innocent Africans to be perfectly justifiable since the righteous Noah initiated the practice. Moreover, God has already established his acceptance of punishing the offspring of those who make mistakes, as was the case for Ham and Canaan.
As with everything else in the Bible, since these are the words of God, there are rules accompanying slave ownership. You may wonder how slave owners were supposed to treat their slaves during their involuntary stay. Did God explicitly allow slave owners to beat their living property? Absolutely! If a man hits his slave hard enough to keep him down for a day or two, but the slave gets back up, “he shall not be punished: for he is his money” (Exodus 21:21). It doesn’t get any clearer than that. God believes that a slave is nothing more than a financial investment of the owner. Well, either God wrote that or he didn’t but, you are not supposed to think for yourself you are to consult the word of God for truth. However, if a slave owner knocks out a slave’s teeth, the slave is to go free as compensation for his injuries. The same goes for a strike to the slave’s eye resulting in a loss of sight (Exodus 21:20-27), but I’d hardly consider inherent freedom to be a fair compensation for permanent blindness. If God doesn’t approve of a regular slave beating, why does he provide these guidelines in the Bible?
Another right of slave owners is to collect a compensation of thirty shekels of silver in the event that another man’s ox gores his property (i.e. slave). That’s the equivalent of $60 US in today’s currency. Sixty dollars seems like a low price for the well-being of another individual, but after all, he is just money. As you should expect, there’s no mention of compensation for the slave if he happens to survive the attack (Exodus 21:32). If you buy a fellow Hebrew, you can only keep him for six years. Once this time has elapsed, he’s free to leave. However, there’s a catch. If the owner provided him with a wife, she has to stay with the master because she is his property. If the couple gave birth to children over the preceding six years, God also considers them the property of the owner. With these factors in mind, the man has the option of staying or leaving. If his final decision is to remain with his wife and children, the paroled Hebrew must agree to become property of his family’s owner for life (Exodus 21:1-6). In a nutshell, a man can leave his wife and kids behind in order to earn his freedom; otherwise, he can stay with them, give up his freedom, and resign to share their fate. No honorable man would choose to leave his family behind in such a selfish act, admittedly this is a quite a clever rip off conjured a primitive mind not a God of love. As a direct result of this “decision,” the slave owner can now claim that the man is staying on his own accord. Another regulation involves buying a “maidservant.” If a man sells his daughter to be the wife and sex slave of another man, she doesn’t have the inherent right to freedom after six years that the Hebrew men. Come on now, give me that argument Christians say, “that is the Old testament” like it’s supposed to be a different God in the New testament or a different “revelation” of the same God.
The author of the first letter to Timothy says that slaves should look at their masters with utmost respect (6:1). This might be hard to do if disrespectable masters are beating and raping their family members at will. In the last known set of biblical instructions for slavery, the author of Titus says that slaves should be educated on how they can be completely obedient to their masters (2:9-10).
Questions?
Genesis 14:14 mentions the city of Dan, but the city didn’t acquire this name until it was seized one thousand years later via conquest. Genesis 37:25 mentions traders with spices, balm, and myrrh, but these weren’t the primary trade products of the region until the eighth century BC. Isaac visits King Abimelech of Gerar in Genesis 26:1, but Gerar didn’t exist until after Isaac’s death and wouldn’t have been powerful enough to require a King until the eighth century BC. Genesis 36:31 says that there were “kings that reigned in the land of Edom,” but there’s no extra biblical record of Kings in Edom until the eighth century BC. Exodus 13:17 details Moses’ uneasiness toward entering the land of the Philistines in Canaan, but there’s zero evidence that indicates the Philistines occupied Canaan until the thirteenth century BC. In addition, they couldn’t have sufficiently organized in threatening numbers until a few hundred years later.
According to the Bible, the Israelite slaves were used to build the Egyptian cities of Pithom and Ramses (Exodus 1:11). Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh’s treasure cities, Pithom and Ramses. Since the Exodus took place no later than 1447 BC, the Israelites would have at least had to start construction on Ramses by that time in order for the story to remain reliable. There wasn’t even a Pharaoh named Ramses until 1320 BC, 127 years after the Exodus. In the case of biblical inerrancy, consider Egypt’s own records. These archaeological findings state that Egypt’s own people built the city and not until it came by order of Ramses II who reigned from 1279-1213 BC. A Hebrew writing a story of his origins several hundred years after all these events had long happened would have had no way of determining when Ramses was constructed without committing to a thorough investigation of Egypt’s historical records. Point blank: the author didn’t have such access and made a poor guess on when the city was actually built.
Upon the Israelites’ alleged escape from their forced construction duties, Moses parts the Red Sea so that they can cross and escape from the pursuing Egyptians (Exodus 14). This was supposed to be the last that Egypt would see of them, and it was as far as the Bible is concerned. Moses seemingly marches his people straight through the other Egyptian regions without contest because the author was no doubt ignorant of the soldiers stationed in the surrounding cities. As you might have subsequently guessed, there are no Egyptian reports of such a massive group crossing these outposts. The story then purports Moses leading the Israelites into the vast wilderness for forty years of aimless wandering. According to the biblical account, Moses freed 600,000 men in addition to the presumed multitude of women and children. If we assume only one wife for each man and only one child for every other couple, which is a very low estimate, there’s a total of one and a half million escapees in addition to the “mixed multitude… of flocks, and herds, even very much cattle” (Exodus 12:37-41). After forty years, the count probably swelled to three million, a number in agreement with many religious Jewish sources.
Since we have millions of mouths to contend with, let’s look at the problem of finding something to feed them. We’ll assume that the Israelites were always nearby to a large water source unless stated otherwise. An average individual requires at least a half pound of food per day to meet typical nourishment requirements. In order to just barely survive, we’ll assume that the Israelites had half that amount over the course of forty years. If each person ate a quarter pound of food every twenty-four hours, the entire camp would need approximately, 375 tons of provisions every day. While we know that they primarily survived off manna, a dried plant material (Numbers 11:6-9), it’s ludicrous to believe that they could obtain this much nourishment day after day without supernatural intervention. Even if you believe that, nothing like that happens anywhere in any records outside the Biblical text.
Considering that the Bible provides some precise locations of the events surrounding the desert journey, archaeological evidence of three million people wandering around in a confined area for forty years shouldn’t be too difficult to locate. In fact, we know that the Israelites were in Kadesh-barnea for most of their long journey (Deuteronomy 1:19). However, not one piece of evidence of an Israeli encampment exist or do we have any evidence for three million people invading the land of Canaan and destroying the inhabitants’ possessions forty years after the Exodus (Numbers 33:50-54). Archaeological findings in the form of bodies, waste products, documents, and clothing tell us that the population of Canaan was never greater than 100,000.
Of the thousands of fourteenth century BC Egyptian records uncovered at el-Amarna detailing the governments, armies, religions, trade routes, and everyday lives of the people living in the region, none record the millions of Israelites allegedly moving about like nomads in Kadesh-barnea are alluded to in any records. In fact, other than the writing in the Bible, we don’t possess a single mention of Israel made prior to the creation of the 1207 BC Merneptah Stele.
The inclusion of city names and tribes that did not exist at the time of Moses’ death, approximately 1450 BC, is equally devastating to the traditional Mosaic authorship claim. Genesis 11:31 says that the Chaldeans lived in the city of Ur during the life of Abraham, but historical records tell us that the Chaldeans didn’t even exist as a tribe until well after Moses was dead. In addition, they didn’t become a prominent enough group to occupy a city until the sixth century BC.
A writer named Manetho of the third century BC wrote that, according to some mythical books, a group of people known as the Hyksos invaded Egypt and took over the leadership for five hundred years before Pharaoh Ahmose expelled them in 1570 BC. Some apologists looking for any loophole claim that the Hyksos are a reference to the Israelites. However, several reasons why this isn’t the case should already be painfully obvious. The dates are way off; the Israelites didn’t invade Egypt; they didn’t stay five hundred years; and Ahmose didn’t run the Hebrews off.
The size of the army Joshua used to conquer his enemies is astonishing even by today’s standards. The greatest nations of the era had no more than 50,000 soldiers serving simultaneously. The military that Joshua claims to be under his command, however, even outnumbers the current United States Army. While there was an astounding amount of soldiers numbering in the hundreds of thousands during Joshua’s conquests, there were over one and a half million enlisted by the time David was King. Such an outrageously sized army could have easily conquered the entire ancient world unopposed if the enlisted men so desired. However, there’s no existing record of a military force even a tenth of that size. In addition, the population problem arises once again because the Israelites could not have possibly grown to this size over such a short amount of time when you necessarily take the subpar living conditions of the era into consideration.
From the pages of the Bible we hear, so the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets: and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city (Josh. 6:20). However, archaeological data shows that the walls of Jericho were destroyed over three hundred years before Joshua arrived. Joshua’s destruction of Jericho stands as one of the most famous battle stories in all history. For six days, Joshua’s warriors marched each day once around the city, as seven priests continually blew long blasts on their ram’s horns and an entourage of priests carried the Ark of the Covenant around the city walls. Then on the seventh day, the priests marched seven times around the wall. As trumpets blared, Joshua commanded the Israelites to shout loudly and the powerful reverberations caused the walls to collapse. Joshua’s troops marched into the city and utterly destroyed what remained, putting to the sword all the men and women, young and old, oxen, sheep, and asses. It’s a pretty gruesome picture and quite a testament to the power of Israel’s god. Many people are determined to preserve the Bible’s reliability argue that the continuous noise created enough vibrations to weaken the walls and that the story has some scientific plausibility. Even if we wanted to stretch our imagination to allow for such an unlikely possibility, archaeological evidence shows that at the time of Joshua, Jericho had neither walls nor residents. The city had been vacated centuries earlier. Jericho was one of the earliest and most ancient cities of the world. Prior to 1300 B.C., the fortifications already had been destroyed, leaving no walls to tumble down before Joshua. At the time of the biblical battle, the city had been completely abandoned for at least a century or two. Not until about the seventh century B.C. do we have evidence for a repopulation of the city.
I do not believe that God told Hebrews or Christians to kill people of different religions. I do not believe that God gave Christians or anyone else, orders to take people and make them into slaves. God did not intend for women to be socially inferior to men. God did not say that he created the universe only a few thousand years ago. I believe God did not kill the entire world in a flood. There’s no evidence God did anything. Men were the sole driving force behind the creation of the Bible’s stories of brutality toward others while at the same time creating a book of morality and a revelation of a God of love.
By contrast, in Ethiopia it was considered quite natural that a woman should have held supreme power. There in Ethiopia is a history of women to whom courage and endurance was attributed, who had intellectual and spiritual interests, and they were willing to endure hardship in search of knowledge. And, until near the end of the nineteenth century the African freedom struggle was a military struggle. This aspect of African history has been shamefully neglected, so I will in some measure address this area of history. I also do not believe the neglect is an accident. Africa’s oppressors and Western historians are not ready to admit the fact that Africa has a fighting heritage. They definitely do not want you to have knowledge that Africans fought and fought well. It is a fact that the Africans did fight back and they fought exceptionally well. This fight extended throughout the whole of the nineteenth century. This fight was led, in most cases, by African kings. The Europeans referred to them as chiefs in order to purposely avoid equating them with European kings. But they were kings in the truest sense of the expression. Most of them could trace their roots back more than a thousand years. These revolutionary nationalist African kings are mostly unknown because the White interpreters of Africa still want the world to think that the continent of Africa waited in darkness for other people, namely White, to bring the light of civilization. Further reading on this subject can be found in the book, The Fall of The Asante Empire, the Hundred-Year War for Africa’s Gold Coast:
It was reported that the dramatic 1879 war between the Zulus and the British army immediately captured the imagination of people throughout the West. In the first great battle of their six-month-long war, the Zulus very nearly annihilated a large British force, killing 52 officers, 806 soldiers, and about 500 of their African allies. More than a century later, the display of red-coated Britons wielding bayonets against the short stabbing spears of flamboyantly costumed, impossibly brave Zulu warriors who fought valiantly continues to be celebrated in books, on television, and in epic motion pictures such as Zulu and Zulu Dawn. The extraordinary bravery and the military genius along with the success of the Zulus earned them the respect of the British who fought against them and fascinated generations of Europeans and Americans, who have read about their resistance or seen it depicted in films. It is presented in this book because it may not be well known among the descendents of these brave warriors. But for most people in Europe and America, recognition of the valor of African fighting men begins and ends with the Zulus. It has gone very largely unnoticed both before and after the Anglo-Zulu war, proud African soldiers fought against invading European armies whose modern rifles, machine guns, and artillery killed them in terrible numbers, yet they fought on. The men, and sometimes proud warrior women, in these African armies were often gallant, and sometimes they won battles despite their inferior arms. We have never lacked courage when it came to protecting our African lands. But most of the battles these African soldiers fought made little impact on European consciousness at the time, and they have since faded into almost complete obscurity especially today.
Some of the longest and most effective military resistance to European conquest took place in West Africa; by far the longest was the century-long struggle of the Asante of Ghana against the British. From 1807 to 1900, again another example of proud warriors and women who stood with them, Asante armies of Ghana fought numerous small and large battles against the British. In several of these military engagements they were the clear victors, the only West African army to defeat a European army in more than one major engagement was the Asante warrior armies. In the final conflict of 1900, despite the British use of machine guns and powerful 75mm artillery, the Asante spirit several times forced British columns to retreat. One of the British invasions of the Asante kingdom was led by Sir Garnet Wolseley, Britain’s best-known general at the time and the man who later commanded British troops during the Zulu war. Wolseley had fought and been wounded in several previous wars, but he called his campaign against the Asante the “most horrible war” he had ever fought in. And he very nearly did not win it.
The Moors
After the African/Grecian civilizations and Hellenistic culture of Alexandria the Romans attempted to carry the knowledge of civilization forward with no great success. The Romans in the fields of science and conceptual thought were second-rate to the Greeks. The Romans did contribute to civilization being carried forward in the areas of sculpture, applied sciences, art and building were considerable and worthy of note. The Romans attempted to postpone the vices of slavery, over extended military exploits and bad fiscal choices and systems of finance from pulling down their empire. But, in just 476 years since the birth of Christ the Empire of Rome was overrun largely by barbarians from the north and the Empire was split in two. By the end of the fifth century, Europe had begun the long plunge into the Dark Ages which was to last for 500 years.
After the fall of Rome the Moors, Black scholars, artisans, teachers and master builders were re-civilizing Europe, great empires were thriving in Western Africa and frequently traded with the Moors. These included the empires of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay, which prospered between 700 AD and 1600 AD. Let me suggest that you obtain a copy of “Hidden Colors 1 & 2.” These documentaries speaks volumes in a concise presentation that broadens the subject matter and will leave no doubt that Blacks came to the rescue of Europe in many historic and profound ways.
Tariq Ibn Ziyad, a young and ambitious African general in 711, led a contingent of approximately 7,000 mostly Moorish soldiers across the Strait of Gibraltar, a mere 13 kilometer, or nine-mile, sea that separates Africa from Europe at the closest point. Tariq was responsible in large part with facilitating the continued Islamic expansion that had rapidly spread across the northern African continent from Arabia, reaching the shores of the Atlantic Ocean during the late decades of the 7th century.
The actual invasion into Europe began with General Tarik who led his troops into battle, shouting at and inspiring his men, “Before you is the enemy and the sea is at your backs and there is no escape for you save in valor and resolution.” The Moorish army was electrified with passion for the fight and yelled, we will follow thee O Tarik as they charged into the ranks of the enemy.
The Moorish soldiers then easily defeated the Visigoths who had controlled Spain since the end of the 5th century. Tariq declared victory at the base of the famous mountain that stands across the straits from Africa and still bears his name: “Gibraltar” a shortened version of the Arabic Gebel Tariq, which means “Tariq’s mountain.” Tarik was triumphant and eventually became the master of Spain.
Over a period of 700 years, 4 superb Moorish dynasties would rule Spain, the Umayad, the Abbasid, the Almoravid and the Almohade. The Black scholar Wayne Chandler traces the origin of the people called the Moors to an African people known as the Garamante. This civilization stood along important trading routes in the Sahara and existed contemporaneously with other great African civilizations including Egypt of the pre-Christian era. The Moors must be distinguished from the Berbers who were a mixed race people in North Africa resulting from the intermarriage between Caucasian Libyans and indigenous Africans. Black Africans had been called dark by the Greeks in antiquity and no distinction had been made between The Moorish tribes which would later invade Spain and their Black African kin. There was also to be an Arab component to these peoples and in order for this to be put in context, the racial composition of Arabia in antiquity must be understood. Much of the Arabian Peninsula had originally been populated by Blacks. The area was a colony of the kingdom of Kush. Southern Arabia, in particular, remained Black for a considerable period as the Greeks themselves attest.
With the coming of Islam, interaction between Moors and Arabs increased but research by historical scholars into the manuscripts and documents of medieval Europe emphatically demonstrates that the prevailing image of the Moor was that of the Black skinned, woolly haired African. There is no question that it was not until centuries later that the distinctions became blurred and the term Moor began to be used for various other ethnic groups as well. This is a tactic used to obscure the past when it comes to the color of the people, numerous names will be used and overtime, “Whitened.”
The Moors were Africans who exercised varying degrees of power and political authority in Spain between 711 and 1492, contributing to the scientific, cultural and intellectual progress, not only of Spain, but of Europe as a whole. During this time, the Moors occupied much of what became modern-day Spain and Portugal. Notice after we educated Spain and Portugal that this is where the slave trade originated. We gave them the knowledge they used to conquer us.
During the European Dark Ages, between the 7th and 14th century AD, the Moorish Empire in Spain became one of the world’s finest civilizations. General Tarik and his Black Moorish army from Morocco conquered Spain after a week long battle with King Roderick in 711 AD. They found that Europe, with the assistance of the Catholic Church, had returned almost to complete barbarism. The population was 90% illiterate and had lost all of the civilizing principles that were passed on by the ancient Greeks and Romans.
Yet, the African/Moors in Spain preserved the academic exploits of Plato, Aristotle and Socrates as well as Christianity. The Europeans used that information especially the introduction of gun powder from the Moors and turned on the people who preserved it for them. Africans not only preserved these Greek intellectual ideas but tutored Europeans after the dark ages and were responsible for their eventual historical glory. The credit has not been given to Black people where it was appropriate. In fact Africa was treated with a total exclusion except for negative views and was relegated to barbarism while Europe gloried in its newly acquired light of day. That is why; it is absolutely crucial and so very important that we reclaim our past glories. Knowledge of the truth of African accomplishments must take its correct place in the history of the world. This truthful historical position puts Africans first and at the beginning of creating of the world’s first civilizations. If we as Africans fail to do that now all attempts for total liberation and the necessary empowerment of African people will come to nothing. That is the monument we owe to our ancestors of the middle passage. We are the survivors of the voyage. To not take action and make something of their sacrifice will mean it was all useless, that all of their prayers, blood, sweat and tears meant nothing.
The Moors reintroduced mathematics, medicine, agriculture, and the physical sciences. The clumsy Roman numerals were replaced by Arabic figures including the zero and the decimal point. As Dr. Van Sertima says, “You can’t do higher mathematics with Roman numerals.” The Moors introduced agriculture to Europe including cotton, rice, sugar cane, dates, ginger, lemons, and strawberries. They also taught them how to store grain for up to 100 years and built underground grain silos. They established a world famous silk industry in Spain. The Moorish achievement in hydraulic engineering was outstanding. They constructed an aqueduct system that conveyed water from the mountains to the city through lead pipes. The Moors of Spain also introduced advanced numerous crops and methods of soil productivity including irrigation, crop rotation and the use of manure. After harvesting, Moorish preservation and drying know-how meant that foods could endure and be edible for several years.
They taught them how to mine for minerals on a large scale, including copper, gold, silver, tin, lead, and aluminum. Spain soon became the world center for high quality sword blades and shields. Spain was eventually manufacturing up to 12,000 blades and shields per year. Spanish craft and woolen became world famous. The Moorish craftsman also produced world class glass, pottery, vases, mosaics, and jewelry.
The Moors introduced to Europe paved, lighted streets. Paved and lighted streets did not appear in London or Paris for hundreds of years. They constructed thousands of public markets and mills in each city. Cordova alone had 5,000 of each. They also introduced to Spain underwear and bathing with soap. Their public baths numbered in the thousands when bathing in the rest of Europe was frowned upon as a diabolical custom to be avoided by all good Christians. Poor hygiene contributed to the plagues in the rest of Europe. Moorish monarchs dwelled in sumptuous palaces while the crowned heads of England, France, and Germany lived in barns, lacking windows, toilets, and chimneys. Human waste material was thrown in the streets since no bathrooms were present.
During the 9th and 10th centuries in the capital city of Cordoba in southern Spain the Moors cultivated the arts and sciences, as well as the standards of etiquette and sanitation. Education was made mandatory by the Moors. The Moors introduced public libraries to Europe with 600,000 books housed in Cordova alone. They established 17 outstanding universities in Spain. Does this sound like or look like the mental image of Africans that you have? And, since Africa is a matriarchal society, women were also encouraged to devote themselves to serious study, and it was only in Spain that one could find female doctors, lawyers, and scientists. Again, far in advance of Western Europe, Moorish physicians were specially trained and highly regulated. They practiced surgery and cauterization (to seal a wound, or destroy damaged or infected tissue, with a heated instrument, a laser, an electric current, or a caustic substance) and understood the importance of cleanliness in the operating environment.
“Europeans offered no competition with Moorish advances in pathology, etiology (the study of diseases) therapeutics, surgery and pharmacology. Texts were written by Moorish physicians describing surgical technique and instruments that were used; doctors specialized in pediatrics, obstetrics, ophthalmology, and in the treatment of hernias and tumors. Moorish scientists were even importing monkey skeletons from Africa for use in dissection when conditions prevented the use of cadavers.”
Now you can see for yourself why this image of intelligent Black people who honored their women is suppressed and not taught in schools where our children are taught about every other accomplishment, slanted in a way that makes you think that only White people have created everything and are the most intelligent and powerful people who have given the world civilization. Nothing could be farther from the truth. Can you now see how Black children are programmed to feel inferior? I personally remember the feelings I had in school even to the point of wanting to be White. And, as embarrassing as it is to say now, giving myself the nick name “snowball,” in high school. I later changed my nick name to ebony genius when I became proud of myself having done some reading back then, searching for my own history.
Black Moorish schoolteachers knew that the world was round and taught geography from a globe. They produced expert maps with all sea and land routes accurately located with respect to latitude and longitude; while also introducing the compass to Europe. Moors were such expert shipbuilders that they were able to use their geography proficiency to import and export from as far away as India and China. It was not by accident that a Moor named Pietro Olonzo Nino was the chief navigator for Christopher Columbus on the flagship Santa Maria. He is said to have argued with Columbus as to who really discovered America. So, in 1492 when Christopher Columbus was approaching the shores of the Americas, this Chief Navigator who was a Black Moor from Mauritania name Don Pietro Olonzo Nino, Captain of the Flag ship—Maria, logged in his diary as their ships approached the shores of the Americas, seeing Black Africans on land, as well as some sailing in large canoes leaving the shores of the Americas, heading out to sea in the direction towards the African Continent (John Jackson, Man, God, and Civilization, p. 286). Born in Palos de Moguer, Spain, he explored the coasts of Africa in his early years. It is now clear he piloted one of Columbus’ ships in the expedition of 1492, and accompanied him during his third voyage that saw the discovery of Trinidad and the mouths of the Orinoco River.
One of the worst mistakes the Moors made was to introduce gunpowder technology from China into Europe, because their enemies adopted this weapon and used it to drive Moors out of Spain. Europe then took the 700 years of civilization and education taught to them by the Moors and used this knowledge to attack Africa.
Let me make this point: While the Moors were re-civilizing Europe, great empires were thriving in Western Africa and frequently traded with the Moors. These included the empires of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay, which prospered between 700 AD and 1600 AD. Africa was not a dark continent awaiting European civilization. In fact, let me say this again, Black African Egyptians and Black African Moors are credited with civilizing Europe. The Greeks never did have a profound effect on European culture.
A brief note on terminology is appropriate here again because some have disputed these facts. The term “Moor” evokes a variety of distinct meanings for different people—religious for some, racial for others. For example, William Shakespeare’s famous fictional character, Othello, is also called that “Moor” of Venice, yet it’s obvious from the play that he is a Christian Black man whose story unfolds in Italy.
In other words, “Moor” for Shakespeare’s Renaissance English audience inclined toward a connotation of non-White racial otherness. Religious significance was not central to the playwright’s definition of “Moor.” Conversely, the term, when used in the historical context of Spain, has always had a concrete religious significance, representing the Islamic culture of the subject, irrespective of his or her race, color, ethnicity or nationality. However, the “Moorish” people, as the Blacks were described in the pre-Islamic era, were noted for their skin color by such descriptive phrases as “Black as melted pitch” and “Blacker than ink,” as quoted by Ivan Van Sertima in his book Golden Age of the Moor. In certain well-known European epics and histories, the phrase “Black as a Moor” was used from Roman times until the Middle Ages. During the middle Ages, masqueraders used to blacken their faces, so they might better pass as Moors.
As is the custom, these legendary figures have been whitened by academia and their influence erased. Yet it is clear that the sweeping wave of civilization brought in by these sons of Africa saved Europe from its backwardness and created the scientific and cultural foundation which would result in the European Renaissance.
The Moors would cultivate in Spain a remarkable legacy that disproves later attitudes concerning Muslims and Islam that began to develop in the West at the waning of Moorish civilization. Sadly, European stereotypical attitudes toward Islam have persisted since the glorious age of the Spanish Moors and continue to influence how some view Muslims today. That is why this information is not available to students going to American schools. Any revelation of knowledge coming from Blacks to Whites is left out of the information given to the general American students in public schools.
Jews and Christians living under Black Moorish rule were linguistically and culturally incorporated into Muslim society and were allowed to continue practicing their individual faiths, to speak their own languages and to build their communities with a degree of independence. True freedom was available to all. The three Abrahamic faiths Christianity, Islam and Judaism not only coexisted, but flourished under Moorish rule. For some Moors, scholarly endeavors were considered divine. The more one knew of one’s self and one’s World, the more one was supposed to know of one’s Creator. The ancient Kemetic creed “Know Thyself” was very much the creed.
Rulers such as the Caliph Abd al-Rahman III, spent almost one-third of the state’s income on education. At a time when most Christian monarchs could not even write their own names, the Caliphs of Moorish Spain were often scholars.
The works of a number of Moors that were scholarly and considered well-regarded, translated their works and they became required texts in the universities which later developed in Europe. These include Generalities on Medicine by Averroes, Solitary Regime by Avempace, Primus Canonis by Avicenna and Al-Tasrif, by Abulcasis, which became the predominant university medical text for Europe’s physicians.
Education was universal in Moslem Spain, being given to the most humble, while in Christian Europe again let me say, over 90 percent of the people were illiterate and even kings could neither read nor write. The Moorish rulers lived in sumptuous palaces, while the monarchs of Germany, France, and England dwelt in big barns with no windows and no chimneys and with only a hole in the roof for the exit of smoke.
The wonders and splendors of Cordova and Moorish Spain made travelers rub their eyes in bewilderment at the grandeur and opulence. For the first time in their lives they saw peaches, pomegranates, strawberries, apricots, lemons, almonds, dates, oranges and sugar-cane growing in the country side. While at public dwelling places they would find coffee, spinach, asparagus, great cooking and all the spices of the East. Not an acre of ground was left untilled, and tunnels cut through mountains, aqueducts, dams and reservoirs provided ample irrigation wherever it was needed.
All over the Black Moorish world a vigorous intellectual life flourished; for the caliphs of both the East and the West were, for the most part, enlightened patrons of learning. They maintained immense libraries and offered fortunes for new manuscripts. In the year 970 AD one of the Caliphs filled an entire palace with books collected from all parts of the known world, and the classified shelves of the library were adorned with 600,000 volumes, all carefully catalogued and in order.
There were numerous schools and places of learning in Moorish Spain. This was not only limited to higher education. The Moors promoted literacy and the advancement of the general population. Schools were everywhere, many of them free of charge.
Beginning with the University of Cordoba, other great institutions were built in Seville, Valencia, Mallarga and Granada. Like the ancient Greeks under the Egyptians, several of the most prominent European Catholic scholars studied under the African Moors in their institutions in Spain. The Moors translated all great works they could lay their hands on from the ancients into Arabic. This included the knowledge of Egypt, Kush, India, China and the Greece. Western historians point to the Greek component of these documents and attempt to paint the Moors as merely borrowers of Greek intellectual culture. This ignores the fact that Greek knowledge comes directly from Ancient Egypt and that there is convincing evidence that the Moors already possessed similar knowledge of their own from their homelands.
A description of Cordova paints a living portrait of the cultural excellence introduced by the Moors into Spain. Cordova in the tenth century was very much like a modern city of today. The streets were well paved and there were raised sidewalks for pedestrians. At night, one could walk for ten miles by the light of lamps, flanked by an uninterrupted quantity and quality of buildings. This was hundreds of years before there was a paved street in Paris or a street lamp in the city London. The population of the city was over 1,000,000 when no city in Europe outside Moorish Spain had a population of 30,000. And, there were 250,000 homes, 800 public schools many colleges and universities, 10,000 palaces of the wealthy, besides many royal palaces, surrounded by beautiful gardens. The largest of which is still one of the architectural wonders of the world in spite of later Spanish disfigurement. Cordova had 471 mosques.
There were 5,000 mills in Cordova at a time when there was not even one in the rest of Europe; and there were 900 public baths, besides a large number of private ones, at a time when the rest of Europe considered bathing as extremely wicked, and to be avoided as much as possible.
Its massive walls have a circuit of fourteen miles and had seven large iron gates faced with brass. Its streets were paved so soundly that in some cases you can tread on the same stones today. There were sewers flushed with water from the many fountains which sparkled in the sun and the city was lit by lamps at night. Water from the mountains was distributed through every corner and quarter of the city by means of leaden pipes into basins of different shapes, made of the purest gold, the finest silver or plated brass as well into vast lakes, interesting pools, amazing reservoirs and fountains of Grecian marble.
The houses in Cordova were air conditioned in the summer by ingeniously arranged draughts of fresh air drawn from the garden over beds of flowers, chosen for their perfume, warmed in winter by hot air conveyed through pipes imbedded in the walls. Bathrooms supplied hot and cold water and there were tables of gold, set with emeralds rubies and pearls. This list of impressive works appears endless; it includes lampposts that lit their streets at night, to grand palaces, such as the one called Azzahra with its 15,000 doors.
The city had 80,455 shops besides 4,300 markets, and in these you could buy amber from the Baltic, Russian furs, Chinese tea, Indian spices, African ebony, and ivory, and such native products in leather metal, silk, glass and pottery and splendors like this could not be found elsewhere.
The intellectual reputation of Cordoba attracted knowledge-thirsty students from throughout Europe. Countless volumes of books on topics ranging from alchemy to algebra were housed in any of Cordoba’s numerous libraries. When these texts were translated from Arabic, the language of commerce and learning, to European languages, Spain’s neighbors were exposed to new scientific advances or reintroduced to old knowledge that had been long forgotten. With the arrival of the Moors in Spain, Europe witnessed for the first time an Islamic religious and cultural presence within its borders that led a viable challenge to Western Europe’s concept of civilization, culture and faith.
Moorish scholars initiated another intellectual revolution by ushering in and promoting: Land reforms in Spain, religious freedom, support of the arts and sciences, a renaissance in knowledge as the wisdom of the ancient cultures was relearned through the works of the Greeks, Hebrews, Chinese, Persians and translating all into Arabic.
They achieved advances in chemistry including the invention of gunpowder, discoveries in astronomy and on the nature of the earth. The invention of the astrolabe an astronomical instrument for taking the altitude of the sun or stars and for the solution of other problems in astronomy and navigation used by Arab astronomers from the Middle Ages until superseded by the sextant and the compass. Also, the medical use of vivisection which is the practice of subjecting living animals to cutting operations, especially in order to advance physiological and pathological knowledge. It was the Moorish chemists such as Jabir who discovered nitric, nitro-muriatic and sulfuric acid. They were well versed in the science well before Europe. The absence of a class system, such that any man (regardless of birth or stature) could rise to any rank except that of supreme ruler were marks of a superior civilization. This was in marked contrast to the Visigoth Christians who were legendry in their cruelty.
Spain under the Black Moors was famous for the creation of hospitals with running water and the widespread construction of baths. Christian Europe held this rite of bating in contempt for centuries. Throughout Spain there were numerous fabulous gardens, latrines with running water hundreds of years before the rest of Europe. Numerous bookstores could easily be found and a highly literate populace took advantage of these opportunities to educate themselves.
The Moors also took interior decoration to new heights in elaborate building ideas. This compares with the rest of Europe where most structures were barren, artless hulks without the minimum of utilities even for hygiene.
There were mathematical geniuses such as Mohammed Ben Musa who wrote the first systematic treatise on algebra, devised a formula for the solution of quadratic equations and was the author of a Treatise on Spherical Trigonometry. There were many experts in the physical sciences. The Caliph Al-Mamum in the ninth century determined the obliquity of the ecliptic and calculated the size of the Earth by sending out an expedition which measured the length of a degree of latitude on the shore of the Red Sea.
The tenth and eleventh centuries brought forth two great physicians: Al Hazen, a famous optician, and Ali Ibn-Isa, a noted oculist. Most of our Western school histories for years, have been teaching us that the prevalent belief before the circumnavigation of the globe by Magellan in 1519 was that the world was flat. This popular view is entirely false, for the Moors in their schools taught geography from globes long before Magellan was born. For example, El Idrisi, a Moorish scientist, wrote a book on geography about the middle of the twelfth century. In that work there appears the following passage: “What results from the opinion of philosophers, learned men, and those skilled in observation of the heavenly bodies, is that the world is round as a sphere, of which the waters are adherent and maintained upon its surface by natural equilibrium. It is surrounded by air, and all created bodies are stable on its surfaces, the earth drawing to it all that is heavy in the same way as a magnet attracts iron.” This has been quoted from Introduction to African Civilization by John G. Jackson, John Henrik Clarke and Runoko Rashidi.
Astronomy, physics, chemistry, mathematics, geometry and geography reached its highest stage of development in Spain. Artists and scholars united in special associations for the pursuit of their studies. There were regular congresses of all branches of science where the latest achievements of research were announced and discussed, which naturally contributed greatly to the spread of scientific thought.
In the early part of the thirteenth century, the Moorish power in Spain began to decline. Unfortunately, the Moslems due to religious and political differences began to split into factions and wage war among themselves. At the same time the Christians of Europe, having absorbed the science and culture of the Moors, which enabled them to bring to an end the long night of the Dark Ages, began to form a united front in order to drive the Moors back into Africa. The dominions were slowly but surely captured by the Christian armies, and after almost a century of brilliant achievement the dynasties ended in the year 1230. The Christian forces conquered one great city after another taking Cordova in 1239 and Seville in 1260.
The Moors introduced the manufacture of gunpowder into Europe. Later the Christian Europeans used this weapon against the Moors.
The word “Moor” literally means “Black,” so the Moorish people were the Black people. Some anthropologists assign them to an arbitrary Brown race, and others label them as Dark-Whites. In medieval times the name of Moor was not restricted to the inhabitants of Morocco, but it was customary to refer to all Africans as Moors. The highly ambiguous word “Negro” had not yet been invented. The Moors did not consider themselves as White men. Moors themselves described those of the so-called cold temperament as having never reached maturity. They were described as men of great stature and White in color. But, they were also described as lacking all sharpness of wit and penetration of intellect. Remember that when trigonometry was being studied in Toledo a European was regarded as learned if he had gotten as far as the fifth proposition of the First proposition of the first Book of Euclid. The curious idea that a great White race has been responsible for all the great civilizations of the past is nothing more than a crude superstition created and propagated mainly by European-oriented bigoted historians.
The expulsion of the Moors from Spain was a serious setback to modern civilization. The true greatness of the Moorish culture is not generally known even to the educated classes of the Western world. But at the time of the Moors, students flocked from France and Germany and England to drink from the fountain of learning which flowed only in the cities of the Moors. The surgeons and doctors of science, women were encouraged to devote themselves to serious study and the lady doctor was not unknown among the people of Cordova. Mathematic knowledge, astronomy, botany, history, philosophy and jurisprudence were to be mastered in Spain and in Spain alone. The practical work of the field, the scientific methods of irrigation, the arts of fortification and shipbuilding, the highest and most elaborate products of the loom, the graver and the hammer, the potter’s wheel and the mason’s trowel, were brought to perfection by the Spanish Moors.
One thing I will say is that at least Europeans had the state of mind to study and use what they learned for the benefit of their people. That is a lesson we as African Americans have yet to learn individually and in mass.
With European domination of Europe followed the abomination of desolation, the rule of the Inquisition and the blackness of lightless darkness in which the light of Spain had been plunged. In the land where science was once supreme, ignorance and incapability prevailed. Where once seventy public libraries had fed the minds of scholars and half a million books had been gathered at Cordova for the benefit of the world vanished. For centuries Spain had been the center of civilization and the seat of arts and sciences, of learning and every form of refined enlightenment.
From a world point of view, while the Moors were re-civilizing Europe, great empires were thriving in Western Africa and frequently traded with the Moors. These included the empires of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay, which prospered between 700 AD and 1600 AD. Africa was not a dark continent awaiting European civilization. In fact, Black African Egyptians and Black African Moors are credited with civilizing Europe. The Greeks never had a profound effect on European culture. In fact, the record shows virulent persecution of the major Greek thinkers by their own society for teaching concepts which were entirely foreign to their culture.
The trial and execution of Socrates took place in 399 BC. Socrates was tried on two charges: corrupting the youth and wickedness. More specifically, Socrates’ accusers cited two corrupt acts: failing to acknowledge the gods that the city acknowledges and introducing new deities. To ascribe one of the world’s greatest civilizations-Ancient Egypt-to Africans, undermines the notion of racial superiority necessary for the European and Arab slave trade in Africa, and its attendant economic, spiritual and psychological onslaught. But Ancient Egypt is prior to Greece as Greece is prior to Rome, and Greece is falsely credited with spreading civilization in Europe.
If you read Plato’s Republic we find out that Socrates was killed because he didn’t believe in the Greek gods primarily Zeus and that he introduced new gods into Greece. Socrates also was charged with corrupting the youth and being like his teacher who didn’t believe that the sun and moon were gods but mere functions and attributes of god like the Egyptians believed. These new deities brought in could only have come from his understanding of the Africa/Kemet/Egypt ideas about God. Other scholars by traveling to Egypt indicated the same source of new knowledge.
Thales of Miletus had to make it clear to Pythagoras that the latter had to go to Memphis, in Egypt, to study. Thales added that it was the Egyptian priests that were the absolute source of knowledge and information. Thales stated this at a time when he himself was Greece’s most famous and applauded philosopher, even though it would be his protégé Pythagoras who is currently best remembered as the “first philosopher”.
After Socrates’ death, Plato was so moved that left for Egypt, where he studied for a period of 13 years. His mentor was Sechnuphis, an Egyptian priest of Heliopolis, which is modern Cairo and therefore very near the Great Pyramids.
Years afterwards, Strabo would travel through Egypt. His Egyptian guide showed him where Plato had lived. It was how Plato learned the fable of Thoth and Amun, which he wrote down in Phaedrus. Despite its clearly Egyptian source, many scholars interpreted that treatise as a typically Greek text. If the Greeks stated they learned their philosophy from the Egyptians, why cannot European scholars simply accept that? Well, it is clear to me that all intellectual thought must come through Whites only in their view regardless of true history. Other nations braced the peril of the seas and deserts to come to study in Africa. These included European intellectual and cultural icons that sat at the feet of African masters and went back to their native lands to spread the light they had seen from the so-called “dark continent”. They came to learn the rudiments of science, mathematics, and philosophy. But don’t expect to find this in mainstream history books especially in America. The ideological position has been, and still is, that nothing came out of Africa but powerless, defenseless, uncivilized, barbaric and primitive peoples and ideas. If so, why did the great Greek philosophers cross the seas and deserts to study in Africa? Aristotle, one of the greatest of Greek philosophers, wrote that “the Ethiopians and Egyptians are very Black”. Herodotus (also a Greek historian) adds that the ancient Egyptians had “Black skin and wooly hair”.
Although Africans and people of African descent are seldom given credit in standard textbooks, African wisdom contributed greatly toward the development of modern medicine. For example, in Western Africa during the Songhay Empire, about 1457 AD, (when Europe was still in its Dark Ages and later being re-civilized and helped by the Black Moors) the city of Jeanne had a medical school which employed 100’s of teachers and was world famous for training surgeons in difficult operations such as cataract surgery. Now when you think of early America, who was doing eye surgery? But, in Africa, they also taught the pharmacological use of over 1,000 animal and plant products for the treatment of medical illnesses. Many of these same medicines in pill or liquid form are used today but the original genius and creative force evolved in Africa. For example, castor seeds, the source of castor oil, were used for constipation and castor oil is still used today. Kaolin was used for diarrhea and is still used today in kaopectate. Night blindness caused by Vitamin “A” deficiency was treated with Ox liver, which is rich in vitamin “A”. Vitamin “C” deficiency was treated with onions, which have a high vitamin “C” content.
The antibiotic penicillin (produced by penicillium mold) and its therapeutic properties were well known by the ancient Egyptians who far exceeded the rest of the ancient world in medical knowledge.
The Kingdom Of Ancient Ghana
Why you need to know your story!
One of the best examples of why this book is being written is shown in the statements made by State Arkansas Republican Jon Hubbard in 2012. Hubbard has a worldview that is grounded in centuries-old racism that still exists in the minds of many today, including stereotypes that Blacks are lazy, unintelligent and generally unproductive members of society.
There were verbal protests about his statements but no facts presented to prove that his statements were false. There were no editorials written by the press, giving the real historical truth about that part of Africa where most of the Africans were taken from and turned into slaves. There were no written responses from the clergy, White or Black presenting the truth of Hubbard’s false claims. No factual statements at all were written. This is why as a people we need to know our own story. You would think those who speak “truth” from our pulpits every week would have the courage to speak but alas they cannot because they do not know their own story. They only know what was given to them in the Bible and that is not a collection of books that presents historical truth about Blacks. It is other people’s slanted view to promote themselves instead of a true historical view of Blacks. Here are some snippets from various news sources regarding Hubbard’s views. When you do not know your own story, others can define you.
State Rep. Jon Hubbard (R-Jonesboro) told the Jonesboro Sun on Tuesday that he continues to believe the viewpoints he expressed in a 2010 book that slavery was a “blessing” for Blacks. In the book, Hubbard argued that Blacks received a better quality of life as slaves in the U.S. than they did in Africa, and that African-Americans would not be in the U.S. were it not for slavery. Hubbard’s comments were first reported by the Arkansas Times on Friday.
Hubbard’s comments have set off a firestorm in Arkansas, with Republicans distancing themselves from Hubbard. Hubbard felt that, Slavery was cruel, but as a result of slavery, we have African-Americans living in this country today who are living here in situations that are probably much better to endure than if they were living in Sub-Saharan Africa. Can you believe the nerve of someone to say that? If shows a complete ignorance of historical truth. If you had the choice knowing the lifestyle of people living in Africa and knowing the lifestyle of people living in the United States, which would you choose? We spend an awful lot of time condemning slavery, but have you ever stopped to think about the good it did?
The institution of slavery, according to his view is that the Black race has long believed to be an abomination upon its people may actually have been a blessing in disguise. The Blacks who could endure those conditions and circumstances, (rape and lynching) would someday be rewarded with citizenship in the greatest nation, according to him, ever established upon the face of the Earth.
Hubbard goes on to argue that in his view, a life of slavery would have been likely much better than a life back in Africa: Knowing what we know today about life on the African continent, would an existence spent in slavery have been any crueler than a life spent in sub-Saharan Africa? He might not think that if it was his own mother being raped.
Hubbard wonders if it will ever become possible for Black people in the United States of America to firmly establish themselves as inclusive and contributing members of society within this country. Does anyone want to tell him who the President of the United States is, or should we let him figure that one out on his own?
Even school integration was a bad thing, according to him as Blacks simply can’t learn to appreciate the value of a good education.
One of the stated purposes of school integration was to bring Black students up to a level close to that of White students. But, to the great disappointment of everyone, the results of this theory worked exactly in reverse of its intended purpose, and instead of Black students rising to the educational levels previously attained by White students, the White students dropped to the level of Black students. To make matters worse the lack of discipline and ambition of Black students soon became shared by their White classmates, and our educational system has been in a steady decline ever since.
Is your White student failing algebra? Chalk it up to desegregation is another mindless statement by Hubbard.
That is why you need to know your story! Had Europeans not invaded Africa there is not telling what Africa would be like. It is and remains the richest continent on the face of the earth and the most exploited.
The Kingdom Of Ancient Ghana
It is a cold hard fact that conquering nations throughout history have always rewritten, stolen or destroyed the history of the conquered nations. European racism and the brutal, devastating effects of slavery only intensified the need to change African history. It was falsely argued that Africans were pagans, savages, and heathens in need of salvation and that the best thing the slave traders did for Black people was to have dragged our ancestors to the Americas in chains, because, according to them, we lacked the intellectual capacity to succeed. It was by far the greatest of lies ever told and nothing could be further from the creditable historical truth! While the Moors were re-civilizing Europe, which had fallen to vast depths, great Empires were thriving in Western Africa and frequently traded with the Moors. These included the Empires of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay, which prospered between 700 AD and 1600 AD.
West Africa just south of the Sahara desert became established as an important area of trade around 700 AD. Advancements in transportation, such as the use of camels instead of horses, allowed for long-distance travel across the Sahara. This region and the kingdoms which arose in it were connected by trade with various parts of Africa, Europe and Asia. In the course of almost a millennium, it flourished at varying times as an economic, political, cultural and religious center.
Over three thousand years ago there were two important developments in West Africa: long distance trade, and the ability to manipulate stone, clay and metals into a sophisticated degree of excellence and splendor. Against this important background, there arose a number of powerful kingdoms and Empires starting in the 5th century through to the 16th century. Common to each of these great Empires was extensive trans-Saharan trade with the North, large standing armies and effective systems of taxation.
The early Kingdom Of Ancient Ghana was one of the most powerful Empires at that time. As a matter of fact, it was the most powerful Empire for several hundred years. At that time the Kingdom of Ghana was more developed than any European country. The Empire of Ghana lasted for over four hundred years. Compare that with the fact that the United States is two hundred and thirty-seven years old as of this writing (2013). Now, do you remember reading and learning about any of the great African Empires and Kingdoms when you went to school? Of course you do not remember because it did not happen.
Ancient Ghana ranks as one of the most noteworthy of African Kingdoms. It became known as the “land of gold” for its role as an economic intermediary within the gold trade from south to north. The founders of Ghana were were experts in making tools and weapons with iron. In fact, their iron weapons helped them to conquer the neighboring tribes and form their Empire. They are also said to have had an inexhaustible supply of gold. It was so plentiful that the emperor passed a law, which said that all gold in nugget form belonged to him and that the people could only use gold dust. It was said that without this precaution, gold would have become so plentiful that it would have lost its value. One gold nugget, it was said, was so large that it was used as a hitching post for the ruler’s favorite horse.
The introduction of the camel, which preceded Muslims and Islam by several centuries, brought about a gradual change in trade, and for the first time, the extensive gold, ivory trade, and salt resources of the region could be sent north and east to population centers in North Africa, the Middle East and Europe in exchange for manufactured goods. The Empire grew rich from the trans-Saharan trade in gold and salt. This trade produced an increasing surplus, allowing for larger urban centers. It also encouraged territorial expansion to gain control over the lucrative trade routes.
The Ghana Empire was an important trading state in West Africa. Ghana became the center for trade, amongst Black Africans in grains, cattle, and metals. Starting from the 700s, camel caravans brought products from all across the Sahara desert to Ghana. The camels brought goods such as books, salt, textiles and tools. The varieties of goods were traded for gold, ivory and slaves with regions south of Ghana.
Ghana was also famous as a trading center where locally produced metal tools, jewelry, leather, and cotton clothes were traded for imports from Moorish Spain and Morocco. Gold nuggets were illegal to trade within it’s borders. All gold was immediately handed over to the imperial treasury in return for an equal value of gold dust. Gold dust had been weighed and bagged for use at least since the reign of the Ghana Empire. Mali borrowed the practice to stem inflation of the gold, since it was so prominent in the region. Gold dust was used all over the Empire, but was not valued equally in all regions.
Again, some have called the Kingdom of Ghana the “land of gold,” a superb description since it was abounding in gold. The gold trade was principally responsible for the development of Ghana into a powerful, centralized kingdom. The peoples of West Africa had independently developed their own gold mining techniques and began trading with people of other regions of Africa and later Europe as well. At the time of the Kingdom of Ghana, gold was traded for salt that came down from the Sahara desert.
In addition to the gold trade, historians have pointed to a second important factor in the development of these West African Kingdoms. This was the use of iron. The use of iron to make tools and weapons helped some people to expand their control over neighboring people. These changes called for new forms of social associations, contributing to the development of centralized, powerful Empires. Historians also say that the use of the horse and camel, along with iron, were important factors in how rulers were able to incorporate small farmers and herders into their Empires.
What is clear is that the Empire derived power and wealth from gold and trading. The introduction of the camel in the Trans-Saharan trade boosted the quantity of goods that could be transported. Important archaeological discoveries late in the 1970’s have exposed a more complex and much earlier development, well before Ancient Ghana of 300 AD. Early state-like communities and even early cities have been unearthed. Surveys and excavations in this region of early Ghana completed in 1984 at no fewer than forty-three sites of ancient settlements, proved that they belonged to an Iron Age culture developing there since about 250 BC, and that the settlements grew into urban centers of natural size and duration. That is far from the picture of Africa projected to the world of jungles and ignorant savages.
Most of our knowledge of Ghana comes from Arab writers. Al-Hamdani, for example, describes Ghana as having the richest gold mines on earth. These were situated on the upper Senegal River. Unfortunately, slaves were sold along with salt and copper, in exchange for textiles, beads and finished goods. However, there has never been in human history a more inhumane and brutal system of slavery than that which became the African Slave Trade.
The capital of Ghana had become the main focus of all trade, with a systematic form of taxation. By the 8th century AD Ghana had become important enough for its fame as “The Land of Gold” to reach Baghdad. Tales abounded far and wide of one particular gold nugget weighing 30 pounds! This was truly a land of astonishing wonders and lavished wealth. These facts are a far cry from the misconception of the Africans languishing in brutal, inhuman conduct, cruelty and ignorance!
Large stone masonry villages have also been discovered dating as far back as 1100 BC. The beginnings of the Empire of Ghana predate Rome which began as a city that grew from a small Italian village in the 27 BC into what later became the Roman Empire. The archaeological finds in Ghana include roads and walls of 2 meters high very likely erected in defense of the village.
By 1068 it was reported in a book by a learned Arab scholar of Cordoba by the name of Al-Bakri that Ghana was the largest, wealthiest and most powerful state in West Africa. The ancient Ghanaian city was described by writers of that day, carefully noting that the Muslim quarter which had sprung up to facilitate the trans-Saharan trade with north Africa, contained 12 mosques, buildings of stone and acacia wood, schools and centers of education. It was described further as the resort of the learned, of the rich and pious of all nations. It was a truly cosmopolitan city where the finest silk and fabric woven with an elaborate design, especially having a raised overall pattern were worn by the general population.
The Empire was situated in the vast Savannah area between the Senegal and Niger Rivers, to the western banks of the Niger, and from the Mandinka area in the south to beyond the fringes of the desert in the north. The sprawling Ghanaian Empire boasted a dense population including many from as far away as Spain. Its streets were lined with elegant houses, public buildings and mosques. The surroundings were rich in pastoral lands including sheep and cattle, making meat plentiful. Wheat was found in the market places in abundance imported from the north, honey from the south and a variety of foodstuffs from other regions. Robes of blue and red from Morocco was a popular fashion at the time. All of which exchanged hands with payments of gold dust, or salt.
The founding ruling people of this “Land of Gold” were the indigenous inhabitants of the area, who at the time became a leading trading centre of the Western Sudan. Those who lived to the north of the upper waters of the Niger River formed themselves into a strong trading state. This state spread its power over many neighboring peoples and in the process the trading state became an Empire. It commanded a large region of trade, security and strong government. The Empire lasted for several hundred years and was deeply respected by travelers who came within its borders, as well as those who read or heard about it beyond its borders.
With the growth of the Empire, they were inventing new methods of governing themselves, of raising money to pay for government, and of producing wealth. These systems, at that stage of social organization, needed a single authority or government that could rule over many lesser authorities or governments. That central authority, according to the thought and customs of the time, could only be a king or Emperor.
The ruler and Emperor of Ghana was described in the following terms by writer Al-Bakri; when he gives and audience to his people he sits in a pavilion around which stand his horses in decorative covering harnesses. The rich and extravagant garments, made of cloth and fine gold were made just for the horses. Behind the Emperor stood 10 pages holding shields and gold-mounted swords and on his right hand are the sons of the princes of his Empire, splendidly clad and with gold plaited into their hair, with attendants standing erect and alert. The governor of the city is seated on the ground in front of the King, and all around him are his ministers in the same position. The gate of the chamber is guarded by dogs of an excellent breed, which never leave the kings seat, they wear collars of gold and silver. Now does this sound like primitive savages as portrayed by History books and the media? Remember the Tel lie vision, (television) view of Tarzan swinging through the jungle with a diaper on and commanding animals and Africans?
Let us look deeper into the truth and facts of our story. Ghana had numerous gold mines. As a matter of fact, Ghana had such a large amount of gold, which miners had the privilege of keeping any gold dust they found while mining! The king only kept the gold nuggets. As Ghana had such abundance in gold, it was used to make almost everything. Statues, jewelry, paintings, and even cutlery were made of pure gold in the Ghana Empire.
Another important title of the king was “Lord of the gold” because he controlled the export of the valuable metal. The king’s main duties were to organize the trade and keep good relations with the Saharan traders, as well as acting as senior religious leader and as representative on earth of the founding ancestors.
The kings of Ghana were able to make lesser kings or chiefs obey their laws and pay their taxes which increased the wealth of Ghana. With more wealth the kings of Ghana had more power. They raised big armies and employed large numbers of messengers and other servants.
The Kingdom of Ghana is generally given the dates 9th to the 13th century AD., by historians. So you are looking at a Kingdom that lasted for over 400 years. I want to continue to point out that we marvel at how great America is claimed to be however, America is not as old when compared to these African Kingdoms of Ghana, Songhay and Mali, which together lasted for a thousand years. This new view on our story puts history in a different light and allows us to see the greatness of our ancestors within ourselves today. Once you know your story it is not ancient because it lives in you today. History is not past when it lives in you.
At the peak of its power, the Kingdom of Ghana consisted of Ghana proper or metropolitan Ghana, and regional Ghana. The provincial part consisted of the states that had been conquered and annexed. Central government was the responsibility of the king and his ministers, the governor of the capital city, and a number of civil servants who, by the middle of the 11th century, were Muslims who could keep records and communicate in Arabic. As a semi-divine ruler, the king could appeal to a vital combination of both the religious and political loyalties of his people. The sophistication of a Kingdom like this in Africa is mind staggering when compared to the view of jungles and savages we have been bombarded with.
The Empire included many different areas whose people were of varied backgrounds and therefore had different religious loyalties to other gods of whom the king was not the earthly representative. A dual system of provincial rule was introduced for the interest of imperial unity. The local ruler was the natural ruler of his own people selected by their traditional procedures and confirmed in office by the king of Ghana proper. In order to ensure the continued commitment of the conquered states, the kings of Ghana insisted on the son of each vassal king being sent to their court. Provincial governors of these areas and local office rulers of conquered peoples had the duties of loyalty to the king. Provisions of annual tribute were sent to the King and the contributions of bands of warriors to the imperial army were sent for when they were required for active service. In return, the king provided protection against external enemies, internal differences between religious beliefs and facilities for sharing in the prosperous trade and the provision of justice to settle serious quarrels that might arise within the Empire.
Ghana’s legal system operated independently. Each village head tried simple cases in his own village but those who were dissatisfied with his judgment could appeal to the provincial governor or tributary state ruler. In the last resort a man could appeal to the justice of the king himself or of his trained judges. Severe lawsuits could be judged according to custom or, if the party involved was a Muslim, according to Islamic law. Notice the clear cut cerebral beauty of this system which gives you options according to your custom or religion. Does this sound like a village of backward people?
Most of the information about the economy of Ghana comes from merchants, and therefore we know more about the commercial aspects of its economy, and less about the way in which the rulers and nobles may have obtained agricultural products through tribute or taxation. Merchants had to pay a one gold dinar tax on imports of salt, and two on exports of salt. Imports probably included products such as textiles, ornaments and other materials. Many of the hand-crafted leather goods found in old Morocco may also have had their origins in the Empire.
Ghana was also a fertile area, its people were able to supply abundant foodstuffs and useful materials for housing for the upkeep of the king and his hierarchy of officials. Another source of wealth was provided by the revenue system of the Empire based on annual tribute in produce, taxes on trade and the spoils of war. These factors all helped the Empire remain powerful for some time, providing a rich and stable economy that was to last over several centuries.
In addition, the strategic position of the capital city was between the gold fields and the desert routes of the North African merchants and gave the city an important position in the Trans-Saharan Trade. As a result the capitol city became an important commercial centre where the essential salt and horses plus luxury goods brought by North African merchants were exchanged for gold, slaves, ostrich feathers, ivory, gum and other commodities. On all their goods the king collected customs duties in gold for both import and exports. Again, any gold nuggets found by gold miners automatically became the property of the king and was added to his treasury which contained lumps of solid gold. This law both increased royal wealth as well as regulated supply and consequently was a reciprocal way of the people of the Empire being blessed.
At the height of Ghana’s prosperity, before 1240 AD, the city of Kumbi Saleh was the biggest West African city of its day and had as many as 15,000 inhabitants. About 320 kilometers north of modern Bamako, Kumbi was a twin city with two separate centers 9.6 kilometers apart. Although the two towns were linked by a continuum of houses, they were distinct in character and function. The one part formed the Muslim quarter where the North African merchants resided during their trading missions to Ghana. This was the main commercial area and their influence was apparent in the many stone built houses, mosques and the presence of many clerical scholars. So long as they obeyed the laws and paid their taxes, the traders were accorded safety and hospitality. This was a partnership in long-distance trade that lasted for a very long time. It was a remarkable, masterful showing of statesmanship finding harmony where all could aspire and flourish in a rich society built on laws that served all the people.
The other city of Kumbi, known as Al-Ghaba, was the more important for it was the administrative centre of the Empire and where the King of Ghana lived in his royal residence made of stone and decorated with paintings, carvings and fitted with glass windows. Yes, glass windows, long before they arrived in Europe. Close to the palace there was a stone mosque for the use of Muslim visitors and officials. The rest of the buildings of Al-Ghaba were constructed of mud and thatch in the traditional manner and around the whole quarter were defensive earthen walls.
The entire area was known as the Gold Coast. Eventually, this area was flooded by colonists that came from England and the French were also interested in this area, due to the fact that many of the natives wore rather impressive jewelry that they really considered commonplace. They did not come as conquerors, they befriended Africans. There is no doubt that some of the ancient Ghana inventions included those that would be used for mining gold. Of course the English and French were interested. They eventually invaded West Africa.
Clearly, prisoners of war were often kept or sold in North Africa or sometimes even to Europe. These early signs of slave trade happened before the arrival of Europeans to West Africa, but only in a very small scale compared to what happened later. With the arrival of the Europeans the slave trade took on inhumane proportions. In 1471, the Portuguese arrived on the coast of Guinea as the first Europeans.
Other Europeans arrive. They are all attracted by gold, ivory and timber. Within a short time the main merchandise has become human life. Slaves for plantations in the Americas becomes even more valuable than gold. England, the Netherlands, Portugal, Germany, France, Sweden and Denmark all compete for the trade, which becomes highly organized. They all take part in the 350 years of slave trade. With its gold and accessible coastline “Ghana” becomes the centre of all European activity in West Africa.
The Europeans trade weapons and manufactured goods for the slaves, which are transported for about five weeks across the Atlantic Ocean to work on plantations in “the new world.” More than two thirds of the slaves died when captured, in the dungeons of the forts or during transport. It is estimated that between 12 and 20 million slaves are transported across the Atlantic. The numbers range from 50 to 100 million Africans who died during the entire process of the slave trade. And yet all you hear about is the 8 million Jews who died under Hitler. And, I am not minimizing their suffering but I am saying that our suffering by comparison is virtually ignored.
Although historically, Ghana was rich in many things, it did not have salt. As salt is an important spice, which is used for day-to-day life, it was very critical for Ghana to have enough and more quantities of salt. They began to trade with Northern kingdoms, which lacked gold. Ghana had very clear regulations, as far as trade was concerned, and therefore all the Northern traders were fair with the trade-they were even ounce-for-ounce.
The king of Ghana was a wise man. He deeply cared for his kingdom, and wanted to make sure that Ghana stayed rich, and had power. That is the reason why he charged a tax on all the people entering and leaving Ghana. The tax was paid in salt, iron, peacock feathers, fine silks, spices etc. The trade routes were protected from raiders by the Ghana warriors in return.
The silent barter system was a system started by Ghana, which did not involve any communication between the two trading kingdoms. Instead of meeting and arguing a price, gold would be left at a special place, and the traders would simply come and take it from that secret place. If the desired goods were not left in the same place, in return, then the trade would immediately be stopped. The trading kingdoms often could not speak the same language; therefore the “silent barter system”, was a very effective and useful way of trading. Most traders were afraid to leave too little in return of the gold Ghana provided them with, for they knew that if they did, Ghana would stop the trade. Afraid that the trade between Ghana and their kingdom would stop, many rulers would always leave a bit more than required, in return!
The Ghana Empire was a very advanced Empire compared with Europe. Most of the population lived rural lives. After many years of living a rural life, the civilians of Ghana were introduced to the iron-working technology. This technology made them achieve many things, which would be impossible to achieve otherwise. The iron-working technology allowed many civilians to lead less of a rural life.
The people of Ghana were ready for trouble, as they had a very large army. However, they wanted to live normal and comfortable lives, like everyone else. The king conducted public prayers in the main city plazas. Storytelling was also very popular amongst the villagers.
In ancient Ghana they mainly ate soups and they were eaten with plantain, cassava, cassava meal with paste, fermented corn dough, boiled yam, rice and bread. The soups were mostly light palm nut soup or groundnut or peanut soup. They would add fish, goat, mutton or chicken and sauces to the soups. Thick soups are the mainstay of the Ghanaian foods and are eaten either rice or potatoes. Other foods were eggs, onions, dried shrimp, tomatoes and squash seed sauce, tomatoes and onions, mashed rice balls with groundnut soup, rice, fried plantain and bean sauce, boiled fermented corn dough, deep fried and heavily spiced plantain and hot pepper sauce. So you can see that the Empire and its people had a rich diet of healthy foods to choose from.
The most important occupations in Ghana were largely farming, mining and painting. The tailors of Ghana produced the most wonderful fabrics and made designs on dyed cloth. Fresh fruits and sweet potato were commonly eaten snacks. The river, Niger, provided water for farming, washing and bathing. At the end of each day, each family would sing many happy and thankful songs together, and then eat a wonderful feast. The people of Ghana loved eating fresh fruits and sweet potatoes.
Hopefully, this historical view of the Empire of Ghana has opened your eyes to the ability of Black people, African people, to create marvelous monuments to their ability to strive for excellence in all things.
The Mali Empire
From the ashes of the Ghanaian Empire emerged a new Empire of truly legendary proportions. The Empire of Mali began in 1230 AD with King Sundiata. He gained control of all the trade that had been monopolized by Ghana. The Mali Empire or Mandingo Empire was a West African Empire of the Mandinka people from AD.1230 to AD.1600. The Empire was founded by Sundiata Keita and became renowned for the wealth of its rulers, especially Mansa Musa I. The Mali Empire had many profound cultural influences on West Africa, including the spread of its language, laws and customs along the Niger River. It extended over a large area and consisted of numerous vassal kingdoms and provinces. Caravan routes have passed through Mali since AD.300. The Mandingo Empire ruled regions of Mali from the 12th to the 16th century, and the Songhai Empire reigned over the Timbuktu-Gao region in the 15th century.
Mali built upon the monopolization of trade and this new kingdom came to power in 1200 AD., and lasted until 1500 AD. It encompassed most of West Africa north of the forested region. One of its greatest leaders, Sundiata is praised in several accounts by griot story-tellers for uniting the Malian Empire. It extended over a large area and consisted of numerous vassal kingdoms and provinces. The Kingdom of Mali came to control the gold trade that the Kingdom of Ghana had controlled before it, but it also expanded its trading in many ways. The Kingdom of Mali controlled the salt trade in the north and many caravan trade routes. Additionally, it traded extensively with Egypt and the copper mine areas to the east.
The Mali Empire flourished because of trade above all else. It contained three immense gold mines within its borders unlike the Ghana Empire, which was only a transit point for gold. The Empire taxed every ounce of gold or salt that entered its borders. By the beginning of the 14th century, Mali was the source of almost half the Old World’s gold exported from mines in Bambuk, Boure and Galam. There was no standard currency throughout the realm, but several forms were prominent by region. The Sahelian and Saharan towns of the Mali Empire were organized as both staging posts in the long-distance caravan trade and trading centers for the various West African products.
The Sahelian kingdoms were a series of kingdoms or Empires that were centered on the Sahel states, the area of grasslands south of the Sahara. The wealth of the states came from controlling the trade routes across the desert. They had large pack animals like camels and horses that were fast enough to keep the large Empire under central control and were also useful in battle. At Taghaza, for example, salt was exchanged; at the city/Kingdom of Takedda, copper. Evidence of copper working has been found at the site dating to the first millennium BC. Ibn Battuta observed the employment of slave labor in both towns. During most of his journey, Ibn Battuta traveled with a convoy that included slaves, most of whom carried goods for trade but would also be traded as slaves. On the return from the kingdom of Takedda to Morocco, his caravan transported 600 female slaves, suggesting that slavery was a substantial part of the commercial activity of the Empire.
All gold was immediately handed over to the imperial treasury in return for an equal value of gold dust. Gold dust had been weighed and bagged for use at least since the reign of the Ghana Empire. Mali borrowed the practice to stem inflation of the substance, since it was so prominent in the region. The most common measure for gold within the realm was 4.5 grams of gold. This term was used interchangeably with dinar, though it is unclear if coined currency was used in the Empire. Gold dust was used all over the Empire, but was not valued equally in all regions.
Copper was also a valued commodity in imperial Mali. Copper, traded in bars, was mined from Takedda in the north and traded in the south for gold. Contemporary sources claim 60 copper bars traded for 100 dinars of gold.
The number and frequency of conquests in the late 13th century and throughout the 14th century indicate the Malian Empire inherited and or developed a capable military. Sundiata is credited with at least the initial organization of the Malian war machine. Sundiata Keita was the founder of the Mali Empire and celebrated as a hero of the Mandinka people of West Africa. However, the military went through radical changes before reaching the legendary proportions proclaimed by its subjects. Thanks to steady tax revenue and stable government beginning in the last quarter of the 13th century, the Mali Empire was able to project its power throughout its own extensive domain and beyond.
The Mali Empire maintained a semi-professional, full-time army in order to defend its borders. The entire nation was mobilized with each clan obligated to provide a quota of fighting age men. These men had to be free men and appear with their own arms. Contemporary historians present during the height and decline of the Mali Empire consistently record its army at 100,000 with 10,000 of that number being made up of cavalry. With the help of the river clans, this army could be deployed throughout the realm on short notice.
The founder of Mali, Sundiata Keita who rose from a royal slave and magician to a leader, also was active in establishing major territories through which gold was traded. We know about him through the writings of a 14th century North African historian named Ibn Khaldun. Sundiata extended the kingdom to include the Kingdom of Ghana and West African gold fields. He introduced the cultivation and weaving of cotton into the region. Sundiata unified the Empire not only through commercial associations but he also laid the foundation for a common cultural identity. As one of Mali’s greatest heroes, his life is recounted in griot storytelling tradition. The griot were members of a traditional social group among the peoples of western Africa whose purpose is to keep an oral history of the tribe or village and to entertain with stories, poems, songs, and dances. The epic stories tell that he was born lame, but was cured by a miracle and later became a great hunter and warrior.
Sundiata was reported to have the use of supernatural powers that are said to have helped him to defeat his enemies and form the Empire of Mali. Under the leadership of Sundiata and his successors, the Malians forged an Empire three times the already remarkable size of Ancient Ghana, and stretched west to the Atlantic Ocean, south into the deep forests, east beyond the Niger River, and north to the salt and copper mines of the Sahara. In fact Mali encompassed a size comparable to Western Europe combined and included Senegal, Gambia, Guinea and Mauritania a truly vast area indeed.
The people of the Mali Empire were described like this. The Blacks are seldom unjust and have a greater abhorrence to unfairness and injustice than any other people. There is complete safety measures and security in their country. Neither traveler nor inhabitant in it has anything to fear from robbers or men of violence. History records and bears witness to the incredible sense of discovery and adventure that these Africans held in their hearts. Does this match with the images of Africans that you have in your mind right now? Then why not, why or do you have a negative image in your mind?
The heartland of the ancient Mali Empire was the plateau between the upper Niger and the Senegal rivers, in the area now within the borders of the modern republic of Mali. At its height in the 14th century AD., the Empire covered a vast area. The Mali Empire was the 2nd largest Empire in Africa at 1.1 million Kilometers, 2nd to Songhay. The Kingdom of Mali included all of Ghana plus a lot more territory. During its time, Mali was the second largest Empire in the world only after the Mongolian Empire in Asia. The dates that historians have designated for the Kingdom of Mali are from the 13th to 15th centuries, AD.
In the 13th century Mali rose to become legendary throughout the Arab world for its wealth and learning. A hundred years later it fell into decline and became the Songhay Empire which then took over the territory. Trade was revived as was the position of Timbuktu as a centre of learning. The Empire Songhay remained in control. The Songhay Empire rose to supremacy approximately 1457 AD and eventually became as large as the United States of America. The Songhay Empire was also a prosperous trading center but became world famous as a center of advanced culture and higher education. Famous universities were established in the cities of Gao, Jenne, and Timbuktu, which employed thousands of teachers who offered courses that included astronomy, mathematics, medicine, hygiene, music, and many others. Jenne also had a medical school that was especially famous for training surgeons in difficult operations such as cataract surgery. Oh, are you surprised?
Professor Ahmed Baba, who was chancellor of the University of Sankore in Timbuktu, was the author of more than 40 books and had a personal library of 1,600 volumes; which he said was small, compared to the library of his colleagues. During the slave trade, many of the slaves from the former Songhay Empire were highly educated and were credited with teaching Caribbean and American farmers’ successful agricultural techniques. They also invented various tools and equipment to lessen the burden of their daily work.
Let us take a closer look at another important figure in the history of Mali is Mansa Musa. He was the best known ruler known to the Arabs and the most famous outside the Arab world was Mansa Kankan Musa. Mansa Musa reigned from 1312 to 1337 during its golden age. He consolidated the foundations laid down by Sundiata and ruled the Empire at its greatest height. In 1342, after his rule ended, Mansa Musa made a pilgrimage to Mecca, which made the Mali Empire world famous. Emperor Mansa Musa’s immense standing and prestige in the then known world was demonstrated in truly spectacular fashion! Mansa Musa sat mounted before a caravan of 72,000, comprised of soldiers and servants and 24,000 pounds of gold, much of which was given away to the poor. Sixty thousand people and eighty camels carrying 300 lbs. of gold each accompanied him to Mecca. This wondrous entourage must have been a truly awe-inspiring sight and is only likened to the caravans of the Queen of Sheba sent to Prophet Solomon in ancient times. It is said that he caused quite a stir due to the enormous number of attendants and amount of gold he took on his journey. Another account puts it this way. When he passed through Cairo, he gave so much gold to the residents that the price of the commodity fell and the whole economy of the city was affected. Under his regime, the borders of Mali expanded greatly into more trade routes and wealth-producing areas.
Between his home land and the fabled city of Mecca, Emperor Mansa Musa’s sojourn radically altered the economy of every state he passed through; such was the impact of his vast gold stores. Egypt’s own economy was almost devastated for 12 years after because of the breath taking amount of gold Mansa Musa brought into that country!
Under Mansa Musa, diplomatic ties with Tunis and Egypt were established, and Muslim scholars and artisans where brought into the Empire. While the Empire grew and became great, the legendary name of Mali appeared on maps even in Europe. During the time of his reign Mansa Musa also became well-known for his work in the fields of politics, commerce and Islam. In the field of politics he extended the borders of Mali even much further and set up a more effective system of government than any of the earlier kings of Mali. Mansa Musa’s administration of justice was fairly impartial and in the field of diplomacy he was able to establish friendly relationships with other African states such as Morocco and Egypt. Much of the eyewitness accounts of life in 14th century are derived from the memoirs of Ibn Battuta, an Arab traveler whose memoirs give a wealth of observation and detail about Mali. Another famous North African scholar, Ibn Khaldun, recorded that “there were diplomatic relations and exchanges of gifts between Mansa Musa and the Contemporary king of Morocco, Sultan Abu-Hassan and that high-ranking statesmen of the two kingdoms were exchanged as ambassadors.”
To help the king in his work, he had judges, scribes and civil servants. These people helped him to fortify the governmental apparatus of the Empire. There were at least 14 provinces in Mali including the province proper where the kings’ capital was located. Most of the provinces were ruled by governors who were frequently celebrated, battle tested generals who had won the admiration of the populace. Others, such as the Berber provinces, were governed by their own Sheikhs. Some of the important commercial centers also had governors of their own. All these provincial administrators were responsible to the Mansa, and they were all said to be well paid. The king also regularly invited and dealt with complaints and appeals against injustices perpetrated by the governors. All this sophisticated machinery of government was expensive to run, and the Mali kings had the usual sources of income through taxes collected on crops and livestock, tolls tribute from vassal states, trade taxes and proceeds from royal estates. This kind of historical sophistication is not taught nor are we as a people celebrated for our past efforts and achievements. Hopefully, as you read this material you will share it with everyone you come in contact with. This book was written so that we can share our past greatness and allow it to become part of our present consciousness.
The Mali Empire enjoyed not only stability and good government under Mansa Musa but also commercial prosperity. As both the salt-producing regions and the gold districts came under her control, Mali was able to attract traders from the north as well as from the south of the Empire. His team of governors and strong army were able to maintain order even among the tumultuous Berbers of the South-Western regions of the Sahara, so that traders and travelers could move to and fro with a sense of security. In this way commerce became very vigorous and traders from different lands such as Egypt and Morocco could be found in the commercial towns.
Mansa Musa was a patron of the arts and sciences and he set about building institutions of learning and embarked upon building numerous universities, schools and mosques in Timbuktu and Gao. They became important trading centers for all of West Africa as well as fabled centers of wealth, culture, and learning. It was in these cities that vast libraries were built. Madrassahs which are schools or colleges, especially a school attached to a mosque where young men study theology flourished. They became meeting-places of the finest poets, scholars, and artists of Africa and the Middle East. Timbuktu, in particular, had become legendary in the European imagination, representing all the wealth of Africa. Several great centers of Islamic learning were also established during the Kingdom of Mali. Among them were the legendary Timbuktu, Jenne, and Gao. Scholars came from all over the world to study at these places, which have a long and rich history of learning in religion, mathematics, music, law, and literature.
Although many people in Mali maintained their indigenous religions during this time, Islam was becoming well established throughout the kingdom. Europeans have taught for centuries that Africa had no written history, literature or philosophy and claiming Egypt was other than African. Showing pictures in National Geographic of people with straight hair looking like they were Hawaiians. Now, roughly 1 million manuscripts were found in Timbuktu/Mali covering, according to Reuters “all the fields of human knowledge: law, the sciences, medicine,” Of course, this knowledge did not make the mainstream news as did the lies continually taught by Europeans concerning Africa on a daily basis in every form of media. Hopefully, this information is making this process crystal clear that we have been written out of history by Europeans and it is not their responsibility to teach us the truth, it is ours.
In the capital city of Niana the Mansa Musa erected the famous Hall of Audience a grand structure which boasted some of the finest examples of architectural techniques of the time including cut stone, adornments of arabesques, windows framed in gold and silver, wooden floors were framed in silver foil and surmounted by a dome. All this information and much more is kept away from African Americans in the school system and you are continually taught that Greece and Rome produced all the thinkers and creators of all things wonderful. Now do you see how great your history really is and how great you are now? This information is not just in the past, history becomes a part of who you really are today and allows your self-esteem to grow and mature. You can stand in the presence of others and not be intimidated thinking your people have not created anything worthwhile in history. You now can appreciate that the world owes to you and our ancestors, a debt of gratitude beyond measure that can never be repaid.
By way of establishing diplomatic ties with other African nations Emperor Mansa Musa sent handpicked gifts of friendship to the sultan of Morocco Abu Al-Hassan who in like manner sent lavish presents in return, but Emperor Mansa Musa died before they could reach his court. His successor Mansa Suleiman nonetheless received the gifts and established a tradition of similar exchanges for years to come. The main commercial centers were its capital Niani, Timbuktu and Gao which later became the capital of Songhai. The major caravan routes terminated at Niani and other commercial staging posts, and defending them was one of the major functions of the Empire. Copper, gold, salt, and kola nuts were pivotal to Mali’s economy. After the reign of Sundiata, Mali became the world’s largest producer of gold.
Ibn Khaldun described the Empire’s capital as “an extensive place with cultivated land fed by running water, with an active population, busy markets and at the time, station for trading caravans from Morocco, Tripoli and Egypt”. However, the commercial centers of Timbuktu and Gao to the north of Niani were even more commercially active.
By the fifteenth century, and like Ghana before it, the Empire of Mali had fallen victim to internal feuding, droughts and invasion. With visionaries like Mansa Musa gone, rival states rose to defy Mali and one in particular ushered in a new golden age.
One of the main things that gave fame to Mansa Musa was his work in the religion of Islam. Mansa Musa was himself a very pious Muslim and wanted to use Islam for the spiritual well being of his people. He devoted a great deal of his time purifying, strengthening and spreading Islam in Mali, especially after his famous pilgrimage to Mecca. After his pilgrimage to Mecca he returned to Mali filled with a determination to purify and strengthen Islam, to promote Islamic education and to introduce some of the new things he had seen on his journey.
As a pious Muslim Musa made the end of Ramadan a national ceremony and built imposing mosques in several cities. He also gave generous patronage to Muslim scholars to encourage them in their study and teaching of the Islamic sciences. The Sankore mosque built in Timbuktu became an internationally known centre of scholarship, equivalent to the medieval universities of Europe. This had a number of practical advantages. Literacy in Arabic facilitated the transaction of government business and also improved political and commercial dealings with North Africa.
The fourteenth-century traveler Ibn Battuta visited ancient Mali a few decades after Musa’s death and was to a large extent impressed by the peace and lawfulness he found strictly enforced there. The Mali Empire extended over an area larger than Western Europe and consisted of numerous vassal kingdoms and provinces. Following Mansa Musa’s death, Mali went into a long decline, shrinking to the size of its original territory by 1645.
The Songhai Empire
Songhay was one of the largest African Empires; the Songhai Empire which bore the name of its predominant ethnic group existed between the early 15th to the late 16th century. It was centered on the city of Gao, where a small Songhai state had existed since the 9th century.
The Songhai Empire emerged from the ruins of the Mali Empire within which it had existed as a vassal state up until the 15th century, with its capital in Gao. Songhai had been ruled by the Sunni dynasty from about 1335, and in 1464 Sunni Ali Ber came to the throne.
The Songhay Empire was the largest Empire in Africa at a peak of 1.4 million km. The Kingdom of Songhay encompassed part of the Kingdom of Mali, as well as land beyond to the east and north. The dates for the Kingdom of Songhay partly overlap those of Mali, although at some point Songhay gained control over certain portions of the old Kingdom of Mali. The dates for the Kingdom of Songhay are between 1350 and 1600 AD. The capital was the city of Gao. Even after its collapse it continued as the Dendi Kingdom (1591-1901) which was finally destroyed by French European colonialism.
Economic trade existed throughout the Empire, due to the standing army stationed in the provinces. Central to the regional economy were the large but independent gold fields. The Songhai economy was based on an occupational class system. The most common were metalworkers, fishermen, and carpenters. Lower caste participants consisted of mostly non-farm working immigrants, who at times were provided special privileges and held high positions in society. At the top were noblemen and direct descendants of the original Songhai people, followed by freemen and traders. The labor system resembled modern day unions, with the Empire possessing craft guilds that consisted of various mechanics and artisans. Now what do you think of that? We as a people are capable of that again!
Criminal justice in Songhai was based mainly, if not entirely, on Islamic principles, especially during the rule of Askia Muhammad. In addition to this was the local minor judge, whose responsibility was to maintain order. Results of a trial were announced by the “town crier” and punishment for most trivial crimes usually consisted of confiscation of merchandise or even imprisonment, since various prisons existed throughout the Empire.
Sunni Ali is widely seen as the architect of the Songhai Empire, building on the freedom of Songhai from the crumbling Mali Empire. Sunni Ali was great warrior-king and made extensive use of Calvary to expand and tighten his grip on a growing Empire. Like the Malian Emperors before him, he understood the importance of the River Niger as strategic resource and built up a navy of war vessels to ensure Songhai control. However unlike the Malian Emperors Sunni Ali rejected Islam and stayed true to his traditional Religious beliefs.
From the early 15th to the late 16th century, Songhai was one of the largest Empires in history. This Empire bore the same name as its leading ethnic group, the Songhai. Its capital was the city of Gao, where a Songhai state had existed since the 11th century. Its base of power was on the bend of the Niger River in present day Niger. The Songhai state existed in one form or another for over a thousand years if one traces its rulers from the first settlement in Gao to its semi-vassal status under the Mali Empire through its continuation in Niger as the Dendi Kingdom.
Economic trade existed throughout the Empire, due to the standing army stationed in the provinces. Central to the regional economy were independent gold fields. The merchants would form partnerships, and the state would protect these merchants and the port cities on the Niger. It was a very strong trading kingdom, known for its production of practical crafts as well as religious artifacts.
The Songhai economy was based on a clan system. The clan a person belonged to ultimately decided their occupation. The most common were metalworkers, fishermen, and carpenters. Lower caste participants consisted of mostly non-farm working immigrants, who at times were provided special privileges and held high positions in society. At the top were noblemen and direct descendants of the original Songhai people, followed by freemen and traders. At the bottom were war captives and European slaves obligated to labor, especially in farming. James Olson describes the labor system as resembling modern day unions, with the Empire possessing craft guilds that consisted of various mechanics and artisans.
Upper classes in society converted to Islam while lower classes often continued to follow traditional religions. Sermons by religious clergy emphasized obedience to the king. Timbuktu was the educational capital. Sunni Ali established a system of government under the royal court, later to be expanded by Askia Muhammad, which appointed governors and mayors to preside over local tributary states, situated around the Niger valley. Local chiefs were still granted authority over their respective domains as long as they did not undermine Songhai policy.
Tax was imposed onto minor chiefdoms and provinces to ensure the ascendancy of Songhai, and in return these provinces were given almost complete independence. Songhai rulers only intervened in the affairs of these neighboring states when a situation became unstable; usually an isolated incident. Each town was represented by government officials, holding positions and responsibilities similar to today’s central bureaucrats.
Under Askia Muhammad, the Empire saw increased centralization. He encouraged learning in Timbuktu by rewarding its professors with larger pensions as an incentive. He also established an order of precedence and protocol and was noted as a noble man who gave back liberally to the poor. Under his policies, Muhammad brought a great deal of stability to Songhai.
As large as the gold industry, the salt industry, and the leather industries were, the biggest industry in medieval West Africa was… books! This is what Leo Africanus, a Moroccan contemporary, had to say on the book trade of Timbuktu in 1526: In Timbuktu there are numerous judges, PhDs, and clerics, all receiving good salaries from the king. He pays great respect to men of learning. There is a big demand for books imported from North Africa. More profit is made from the book trade.
There are an astonishing 700,000 surviving manuscripts in Timbuktu. It is thought that a quarter of these books are about law. Others were about the Koran, history, logic, ethics, biographies, mathematics, astronomy and astrology, medicine and geography.
Also in Africa are these known facts: The main trading product that the East Africans sold was steel. East Africans had been making this product for over 2,000 years. In 1978, thirteen ancient iron furnaces were discovered in Tanzania. These East African smelters made the finest steel produced anywhere in the world before the year 1800. The East African cities minted their own coins of copper and silver. The first coins were issued in the eleventh century. They had rhyming couplets on them praising the king and praising God. Now that you know, teach.
Dr. Martin Luther King and the Bible
This is a very important piece of information with regard to how Martin Luther King viewed the history of Christianity. It proves that he was a very deep thinker and a research scholar. This should give you, the reader a new view of his depth of understanding and open the door to your own investigation of the past. Martin was bold enough to do the research and then write about it. I suggest that you look up the entire writing assignment paper and see it for yourself. It is important beyond words that we develop a desire to know the truth for ourselves beyond what we have been told.
On November 29, 1949 through February 15, 1950 Dr. Martin Luther King developed an essay for the course, “Development of Christian Ideas.” The response from his teacher was interesting. I am only drawing excerpts from the entire response. You the reader may do additional research and I am sure you will be able to see how cleverly Martin’s teacher answered his paper. My personal opinion is that once again someone else must define and guide all inquiry into the “accepted” positions on Biblical research. Let me examine the response.
Davis gave the essay an A, stating: “This is very good and I am glad to have your conclusion. It is not so much that Christianity was influenced by the Mystery Cults, or borrowed from them, but that in the long process of history this religion developed. It, Christianity, is the expression of the longing of people for light, truth, salvation, security.”
Notice while acknowledging that the work is good, he immediately re-directs Martin’s conclusion while at the same time saying he was “glad” to have it. He excludes the whole premise of influence by saying that it was the longing of the people for light, truth, salvation, (and) security. And his statement speaks for itself. By saying, “It is not so much,” and “It is not.” Everything that follows is meant to disqualify any outside influence into the creation of the Christian religion.
I will present the rest of his comments for evaluation so we can trace the continuing theme of discrediting any contemporary or ancient influence on the formation of the Christian religion.
“That is, with this study you have made, we see the philosophy both of Religion and History. Underneath all expression, whether words, creeds, cults, ceremonies is the spiritual order—the [ever] living search of men for higher life—a fuller life, more abundant, satisfying life.
That is essential. Never stop with the external, which may seem like borrowing, but recognize there is the perennial struggle for truth, fuller life itself. So, through experience, knowledge, and other forms of intellectual progress, the outer manifestations of religion change. The inner spiritual, continues ever. (I made a slight modification in the quote for a better understanding).
His use of the word “philosophy” just means everything that Martin knows about religion and history. I do not want that phrase to throw you off. The teacher goes on to include a whole list of items relating to religion, words, creeds etc. indicating man’s search for a fuller, more abundant, satisfying life through the means mentioned before, namely religion. Then he moves to the important message he wishes to convey to Martin. He starts out in this last paragraph by saying, “that is essential,” but pivots quickly into saying everything “Never stop with the external,” as if what Martin had to say in the whole paper does not matter with regard to any outside influence on Christianity. Then he launches into a spiritual monument of words which is meant to completely negate any outside influence from any other religion or religious ideas completely. Martin Luther King and all of us must be kept on the spiritual, religious and historical plantation. How dare we investigate outside what was given to us and attempt to bring anything from outside, “the box,” created by Europeans.
Again, I suggest a closer look at Martin’s complete work online using the title, Martin Luther King on Mystery Religions “The Influence of the Mystery Religions on Christianity.”
For the purposes of this book we want to take a closer look at Martin’s work on “The Influence of Osiris and Isis.” One of the purposes of this book is to examine and expose the Black influence in the creation of spiritual, religious and scientific thoughts which has directly influenced the writing of the collection of books called the Bible. One way to do that is to add legitimacy to the investigation by referencing Martin Luther King’s work. This brings to light more of Martin’s broad ranging scope of examination while adding Martin’s authority to my investigation. He was not just a recipient of years of specialized training in European ways of thinking about religious history and influence. He explored information and historical perspectives outside the influence of his teachers and their methods of religious inquiry. The following is a direct quote from Martin’s work. I have focused on areas I observed that I think are important and that show a direct correlation between ancient Kemetic spiritual thought and practice and the Biblical themes.
For 2,000 years the West has dominated the minds of men around the world by the idea that Christianity is sacred and unique while Paganism, so-called polytheism and ancient beliefs are primitive and the work of the Devil. To even consider that they could be parts of the same folklore has been simply unimaginable. Therefore, although the true origins of Christianity have been obvious all along to those who have studied outside the Biblical text, few have been able to see them, because to do so requires a radical break with the conditioning of our Christian culture.
The Egyptian mysteries of Isis and Osiris exerted considerable influence upon early Christianity. These two great Egyptian deities, whose worship passed into Europe, were revered not only in Rome but in many other centers where Christian communities were growing up. Osiris and Isis, so the legend runs, were at one and the same time, brother and sister, husband and wife; but Osiris was murdered, his coffined body being thrown into the Nile, and shortly afterwards the widowed and exiled Isis gave birth to a son, Horus. Meanwhile the coffin was washed up on the Syrian coast, and became miraculously lodged in the trunk of a tree. This tree afterwards chanced to be cut down and made into a pillar in the palace at Byblos, and there Isis at length found it. After recovering Osiris’ dismembered body, Isis restored him to life and installed him as King in the nether world; meanwhile Horus, having grown to manhood, reigned on earth, later becoming the third person of this great Egyptian trinity.
At the heart of this long saga were myths concerning a dying and resurrecting god man, who was known by many different names throughout history. In Egypt he was Osiris, in Greece Dionysus, in Asia Minor Attis, in Syria Adonis, in Italy Bacchus, in Persia Mithras. Fundamentally all these god men are the same based on the same mythical and astronomical ideas.
In the Greek historical records of both Herodotus and Plutarch we find that there was a festival held each year in Egypt celebrating the resurrection of Osiris. While Herodotus fails to give a date for this festival, Plutarch says that it lasted four days, giving the date as the seventeenth day of the Egyptian month Hathor, which, according to the Alexandrian calendar used by him, corresponded to November 13th. Other Egyptian records speak of another feast in honor of all the dead, when lamps were lit as a memorial, which was held about November 8th.
It is interesting to note the copying in that the Christian feast of all Souls, in honor of the dead, likewise falls at the beginning of November; and in many countries lamps and candles are burned all night on that occasion. There seems little doubt that this custom was identical with the Egyptian festival. The festival of all Saints, which is held one day before that of all Souls is also probably identical with it in origin. This still stands as a festival in the Christian calendar; and thus Christians unconsciously perpetuate the worship of Osiris in modern times. Boy, I would be willing to bet this information surprises you!
However this is not the only point at which the Religion of Osiris and Isis exerted influence on Christianity. There can hardly be any doubt that the myths of Isis had a direct bearing on the elevation of Mary, the Mother of Jesus, to the lofty position that she holds in Roman Catholic theology. As is commonly known Isis had two functions which her worshippers warmly commended her for. Firstly, she was pictured as the lady of sorrows, weeping for the dead Ausar/Osiris. And secondly, she was commended as the divine mother, nursing and nurturing her infant son, Heru/Horus. Isis was represented in tens of thousands of statuettes and paintings, holding the divine child in her arms. Now when Christianity triumphed through force and warfare, we find that these same paintings and figures became those of the Madonna and child with little or no difference. In fact archaeologists are often left in confusion in attempting to distinguish the one from the other.
Why are these remarkable similarities not common knowledge? This is because, as has been discovered later, the early Roman Church did everything in its power to prevent us from perceiving and understanding the similarity in them.
It is also interesting to note that in the second century a story began to spread stating that Mary had been miraculously carried to Heaven by Jesus and His angels. In the sixth century a festival came to be celebrated around this event known as the festival of Assumption, and it is now one of the greatest feasts of Roman Catholicism. It is celebrated annually on August 13th. But it was this very date that the festival of Dianna or Artemis was celebrated, with whom Isis was identified. Here we see how Mary gradually came to take the place of the goddess Aset/Isis.
These facts allow us to see more clearly how religions are formed. They do not arrive fully developed but are direct results of progressive changes over time adopting other forms from right around them culturally and with scholarly corrections along the way.
The Bible
The Old Testament was the consequence of many revisions and changes over time. The concept of a Hebrew canon probably first began to be brought together and emerge shortly after the Babylonian Exile 587 BC., when the Hebrew people were transported against their will away from the Holy Land. The religious leaders were fearful of growing cultural and religious contamination, tried to create an official version of the various scriptures and gather them into one whole collection. Some writings were selected and others were not. Are they inspired? Yes, by good intentions, by a desire to explain God, in my opinion, yes. Can you find a relationship with the almighty using these testimonies, stories and concepts in these books? Definitely yes, the almighty will respond to anyone if you desire His fellowship in your heart, and, are there other reasons and intended purposes for these writings? Yes. So, you can see these Hebrew people thought so much of what God was doing for them that they wanted to preserve their own culture and beliefs for the benefit of their own culture.
The same process of selection and tension between competing ideas is used in the New Testament. Some books are chosen by men other books are not chosen, by men. There is a central theme or idea in that writings are chosen to promote and support the main agreed upon idea. What I am saying is that these chosen books are a construction by men; rabbi’s, priests and scribes for sure men nonetheless. You and countless others over centuries have been told and believe that these writings are “The Word of God,” in its entirety. In countless services round the world you are told repeatedly and sometimes with Bibles held high, “This is the Word of God and I can do what it says I can do. Today I will be taught “The Word of God.”
The geneses of the collection of books later called the Bible is a construction over many centuries of natural and human agencies which have been employed in writing, transcribing, editing, preserving, transmitting, translating, and publishing the Bible. Parts of the Hebrew Bible, particularly the Torah and some sections of the Former Prophets, the narrative books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings and the Latter Prophets, the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel and the Twelve Minor Prophets appear to have been standardized by about the year 300 BC, as evidenced by the Dead Sea Scrolls. The rest was still in fluctuation for 200 years. Sometime around 95 AD., perhaps twenty years after the Romans destroyed Jerusalem during the Jewish-Roman War, a council of exiled Jewish rabbis met in Western Palestine. The council, (men) officially “closed” the canon of the Hebrew Bible, intending for no new works to be added.
Before this time, the Song of Solomon, and Ecclesiastes had been considered uncertain as sources. The council of exiled Jewish rabbis at Jamnia asserted that these should be considered “real” scripture. They officially divided the Hebrew Bible into three sections but they apparently excluded the Old Testament Book of Daniel.
However, many rabbis could not agree completely about which books should be in this canon in spite of the Jamnian Council. Some Jewish communities raised questions over Ezekiel, the Song of Solomon, and Esther, for instance. Many Jewish communities accepted some of these texts, but rejected others. In general, however, only a few versions of the official cannons were approved across the ancient world.
The first is what scholars call The Hebrew Canon or the Palestinian Canon This first canon contains 24 books in the Old Testament. It appears as a reaction to the fall of Jerusalem in 70 AD., and responds to the rising Christian movement by “closing of the ranks” in the Jewish community
Christians later took the 24-book model and altered it, chopping the collection into 39 books in several ways, such as cutting Samuel into 1st and 2nd Samuel, or dividing the book of Minor Prophets into twelve separate books. Hebrew scribes prefer in general to classify the Hebrew Canon into three sections (1) The Torah (the Law), (2), the Prophets, and (3) the Writings. Protestant Christians divide the Hebrew Canon instead into five groupings: Law, History, Poetry and Wisdom, and the Prophets. Once again there were disputes and disagreements among various sects and influential priests about what should be considered scripture.
The Alexandrian Canon arose in Alexandria, Egypt, where many Jews resided during the Greek period, 330-30 BC. It was probably about this time that the Jewish tradition developed the idea of an immortal soul. Previously, older books of the Bible often stressed Sheol or “the grave”, and did not dwell on a potential afterlife. The doctrine of the grave reflected a more traditional religious perspective that persisted even unto the time of Christ, where we still find the Sadducees embracing the older beliefs.
Much of this information is taught in Seminary and is not just my opinion. The Torah (Law), the first five books of the Old Testament, appeared as a collection possibly as early as the Babylonian captivity. It was probably accepted as authoritative sometime after the Babylonian exile, perhaps during the time of Ezra (5th century BC). For the Sadducees and the Samaritans, the canonization process stopped here. They argued that none of the later additions to the Hebrew Bible were legitimate. This is why you see different views within the Hebrew religious beliefs even in the gospels.
The Prophets, for the Hebrew editors, existed as a collection by at least the second century BC. The apocryphal book of Ecclesiasticus, the Wisdom of Jesus, the Son of Sirach, had a prologue attached to the work. Sirach’s grandson probably did this about 132 BC. He refers to the “the law and the prophets” and the “others” or the “other books.” This is the earliest evidence we have that the first two parts of the Old Testament Canon had been linked together and anthologized and that the first half of the Canon was on its way to becoming accepted as authoritative.
The Writings are the third division of the Hebrew Canon. By the time of Jesus and the early church, we can see the Jews accepted them as authoritative. Luke 24:44 and Matthew 23:35 contain statements strongly indicating the authors already had some vague idea of an authoritative collection; one covering the range from Genesis to Chronicles, the entire range of Old Testament Scripture. Hence, the Old Testament or the Hebrew Bible had gained recognition as official by 90 AD, and it would receive official sanction in the Council of Jamnia.
The New Testament Tradition, however, awaited the Council of Nicaea’s influence about 323-325 AD. It took a few hundred years to finalize.
During the first stage from 90 AD to 96 AD, the young Christian church discovered that Christ had not yet returned as predicted, and the generation of the apostles and those who had directly encountered the Christ was rapidly dying out. Originally, knowledge of the Christ had been transmitted orally. At this point, the church fathers wrote down the early Gospels from these oral traditions and preserved the Pauline letters as ways to give pastoral guidance to new churches. The writers who still expected Christ’s return any day probably did not imagine that their writings would be part of a future “canon,” and they in all probability did not seek to normalize or standardize any of their texts against other versions. The Gospel of Mark was probably written first. Scholars date it most commonly to around 70 AD the year Titus and his Roman armies destroyed Jerusalem. Mark is generally though not universally thought to be the oldest of the Gospels but there was some source documents that led to the creation of Mark, with the others appearing in later decades after the year 90-150 AD, about sixty to a hundred-twenty years after Jesus’ crucifixion. There are no original documents.
From 96 AD until about 150 AD, the written gospels gradually replaced the oral traditions. To begin with, early Christians relied on oral traditions alongside and many times even in preference to the written Gospels, but as the reliability of the former declined, the four Gospels replaced them.
The Jewish Wars
The formation of the Christian religion happened at a time when there were wars being fought between the Jews and the Roman Empire. It is important to have a proper historical context surrounding what is commonly called “the Word of God.” If the Bible and what you learned in Sunday School is your only source of history then you are mislead and purposefully guided into viewing history as other people have decided for you to “see” it. The following is part of what was really going on and why it serves the Roman Empire to help in the formation of a Religion that changed a warrior Messiah into one that says pay your taxes, turn the other cheek and I am coming back to save you.
The First Jewish-Roman War (66-73 AD), sometimes called The Great Revolt was the first of three major rebellions by the Jews of Judaea Province, against the Roman Empire just after the time of Jesus and the disciples. The second was the Kitos War in 115-117 AD; is the name given to the second of the Jewish-Roman wars. Major revolts by Diaspora Jews in Cyrene (North Africa), Cyprus, Mesopotamia and Egypt spiraled out of control, resulting in a widespread slaughter of Roman citizens and others 200,000 in Cyrene, 240,000 in Cyprus according to the historical writings of Cassius Dio. The rebellions were finally crushed by Roman legionary forces, chiefly by the Roman general Lusius Quietus.
Even before the Jewish wars there were uprisings. In the Judas uprising (6 AD) Judas of Galilee led a violent resistance to the census imposed for Roman tax purposes, around 6 AD. The revolt was crushed brutally by the Romans. These events are discussed by Josephus in Jewish Wars and in Antiquities of the Jews.
The Alexandrian riots in Alexandria (38 AD) were attacks directed against Jews in 38 AD in Roman Alexandria, Egypt. The sole source comes from Philo of Alexandria, himself a Jew, who witnessed the riots and afterwards led the Jewish delegation to the Roman emperor Caligula, and requested the re-establishment of legal Jewish residence in Alexandria.
Jacob and Simon uprising (46 AD) refers to the revolt instigated in Roman Judea by two brothers Simon and Jacob in 46-48 AD. The revolt, which concentrated in the Galilee, began as a sporadic insurgency and then when it climaxed in 48 AD it was quickly put down by Roman authorities and both brothers were executed.
The third major revolt was Bar Kokhba’s revolt of 132-135 AD. It was the third major rebellion by the Jews of Judaea Province against the Roman Empire and the last of the Jewish-Roman Wars. Simon bar Kokhba, the commander of the revolt, was acclaimed as a Messiah, a heroic figure who could restore Israel to power. The revolt established an independent state of Israel over parts of Judea for over two years, but a Roman army made up of six full legions with auxiliaries and elements from up to six additional legions finally crushed it.
These were the types of Messiah figures that the Jews were looking for and trusting that Jehovah would send to free them from Roman domination. However, after the Romans defeated them they then barred Jews from Jerusalem. Although Jewish Christians hailed Jesus as the Messiah and did not support Bar Kokhba, they were barred from Jerusalem along with the rest of the Jews. The war and its aftermath helped differentiate Christianity as a religion distinct from Judaism. The rebellion is also known as The Third Jewish-Roman War or The Third Jewish Revolt.
In 63 BC the Roman armies laid siege to the temple and held up for three months. They attacked on the Sabbath knowing the priests offered the usual prayers and sacrifices in the Temple. Please note that they were praying and worshiping Jehovah when their enemies attacked.
At some point the Roman command of the revolt’s suppression was then handed to General Vespasian and his son Titus, who assembled four legions and began cleansing the country, starting with Galilee, in the year 67 AD. The revolt ended when legions under Titus besieged and destroyed the center of rebel resistance in Jerusalem in the year 70 AD, and defeated the remaining Jewish strongholds later on.
The actual siege of Jerusalem in 70 AD quickly turned into a stalemate. Unable to breach the city’s defenses, the Roman armies established a permanent camp just outside the city, digging a trench around the circumference of its walls and building a wall as high as the city walls themselves around Jerusalem. Anyone caught in the trench, attempting to flee the city would be captured, crucified, and placed in lines on top of the dirt wall facing into Jerusalem. The Romans began to construct ramparts for the siege. Those attempting to escape the city were crucified, with as many as five hundred crucifixions occurring in a day.
When the ramparts fell 12,000 Jews were slaughtered few resisted numbers surrendered many leap to their death from the walls. The Roman army was ordered to leave the treasures of the temple untouched but exacted an indemnity of $3,000,600,000 from the Jewish nation in 54 BC a battle that lasted for 9 years. Later Roman armies robbed the Temple of the treasures amounting to some 10,000 talents which is an enormous amount of money today, somewhere in the high billions of dollars.
The revolution had captured Jerusalem and nearly all of Palestine when a priest named Josephus wished to surrender. His men threatened to kill him. They preferred death to capture. Josephus eventually surrendered and as he was about to be sent to Rome in chains Josephus prophesied that his captor would be Emperor. His captor embraced him and gradually accepted him as a useful advisor and the war against the Jews. Josephus accompanied Titus to the siege of Jerusalem. The approach of the legions brought the Jewish defenders to a late and fanatical unity. 60,000 rebels gathered in the city women and men alike appeared with arms and prepared to fight to the death. Josephus called to them from the Roman lines to surrender and they branded him a traitor and fought to the last. Starving Jews made desperate attacks to look for food. Thousands of them were captured by the Romans and were crucified.
In the later stages of the battle the streets of the city were clogged with corpses, 116,000 bodies with thrown over the walls of the Temple. Some Jews swallowed gold pieces and tried to slip out of Jerusalem. Romans soldiers capturing them slid open their bellies to find the coins. Titus offered what he thought was compassionate terms to the rebels and they rejected them. The Romans set fire to the Temple and the great edifice much of it made of wood so it was rapidly consumed. Surviving defenders fought bravely proud to the last only to die on the temple grounds. Some killed one another some fell on their own swords some leaped into the flames. The victors gave no quarter but slew all Jews upon whom they could lay their hands. Some 97,000 fugitives were caught and sold as slaves many of them died and became unwilling gladiators in the triumphal games that were celebrated at Caesarea Philippi and Rome. Josephus numbered at least 1,197,000 Jews killed. Essentially, the destruction of the Temple became the end of the rebellion and of the Jewish state.
Judaism was now a religion without a central shrine without a dominant priesthood and without a sacrificial service. The Sadducees disappeared, while the Pharisees and the rabbis became the leaders of the homeless people that had nothing left but its synagogues and its hope. After the fall of Jerusalem Josephus sailed to Rome with Titus and accompanied the conqueror of his people in a triumphal procession that exhibited captive Jews and Jewish spoils. Josephus was given Roman citizenship and a pension and apartment in his palace and profitable lands in Judea. In return Josephus took the family name Flavius and wrote the war of the Jews.
Jews were forbidden not only circumcision they were also denied the observance of the Sabbath or any Jewish holy day and the public performance of any Hebrew ritual. A new and heavier poll tax was placed upon all Jews. They were allowed in Jerusalem only on one fixed day each year, when they might, weep before the ruins of the Temple. Public instruction in the law was prohibited on the pain of death and several rabbis were executed.
After the failed Great Jewish Revolt in 70 AD, and because the Great Revolt of 70 AD had resulted in the destruction of Jerusalem, the Council at Yavne provided spiritual guidance for the Jewish nation, both in Judea and throughout the Jewish Diaspora.
The defeat of the Jewish revolt altered the Jewish Diaspora, since many of the Jewish rebels were scattered or sold into slavery. Josephus claims that 1,100,000 people were killed during the siege, a sizeable portion of these died due to illnesses brought about by hunger. Around 97,000 were captured and enslaved and many others fled to areas around the Mediterranean. Josephus puts the number of the besieged at near 1 million. The treasures of Jerusalem were taken by the Romans.
The Jews of serene Africa Egypt Cyprus and Mesopotamia rose once more again against Rome, 220,000 men were killed in Cyrene Africa 240,000 in Cyprus the figures are incredible. The uprisings were suppressed, but the surviving Jews kept alive their hopes of a Messiah who would rebuild the Temple and restore them in triumph to Jerusalem. The Jews made a last effort in history to recover their homeland and their freedom in 130 to AD. For three years rebels fought valiantly against the legions finally they were beaten by a lack of food and supplies. The Romans destroyed 985 towns and slew 580,000 men a still larger number to starvation and disease, nearly all Judea was laid waste.
The Flavian dynasty was a Roman Imperial Dynasty, which ruled the Roman Empire between 69 and 96 AD, encompassing the reigns of Vespasian (69-79), and his two sons Titus, (79-81) and Domitian (81-96). The Flavians rose to power during the civil war of 69. The Flavian dynasty lasted from 69 to 96 C.E., the period when most scholars believe the Gospels were written. The Flavian Caesars wanted more than just to transform messianic Judaism. They wanted Christianity to flourish. The Flavians shared control over this region between Egypt and Syria with two families of powerful Hellenized Jews: the Herods and the Alexanders, rich and powerful families. These three families shared a common financial interest in preventing any future revolts.
The famous Jewish philosopher Philo Judeaus was the leading intellectual figure of Hellenistic Judaism. Philo’s writings attempted to merge Judaism with Platonic philosophy. Scholars believe that his work provided the authors of the Gospels with some of their religious and philosophical perspective.
Many Jews continued to believe that God would send a Messiah, a son of David, who would lead them against the enemies of Judea. Flavius Josephus records that what had most inspired the Jews to fight against Rome was their belief that God would send a Messiah to Israel who would lead his faithful to military victory. Though the Flavians, Herods, and Alexanders had ended the Jewish revolt, the families had not destroyed the messianic religion of the Jewish rebels. The families needed to find a way to prevent the Zealots from inspiring future uprisings through their belief in a coming warrior Messiah.
The way to tame messianic Judaism would be to simply transform it into a religion that would cooperate with the Roman Empire. To achieve this goal would require a new type of messianic literature. Thus, what we know as the Christian Gospels was created around that same time.
The birth of Christ was in approximately 4 BC and the crucifixion AD.30 to AD. 33. The conversion of Paul and his first missionary journey was in 45 to 47 AD. The second mission, 50 to 53 AD., the third mission of Paul was and 53 to 57 AD. Paul was imprisoned by Felix from 58 to 60 AD. Paul was again imprisoned in Rome from 61 to 64 AD. The four Gospels were written anywhere from 60 to 100 AD. The earliest external reference to the Gospel of Mark is dated to 130 AD. Ignatius, the Bishop of Antioch, makes indirect references to Matthew as early as 110 AD. Nothing is mentioned in those books about the savagery of the wars throughout that time in Palestine. That area was not much larger than New Jersey where these wars were fought. The stories in the Bible are told as if they happened in a safe bubble of time not related to the reality of the times. I leave you to think about these conflicting realities. Again I say, Israel is about the size of New Jersey and with all that warfare there is only the prophecy of Jesus warning the Jews in Jerusalem.
To produce the Gospels required a deep understanding of Judaic literature. The Gospels would not simply replace the literature of the old religion, but would be written in such a way as to demonstrate that Christianity was the fulfillment of the prophecies of Judaism and had therefore grown directly from it. To achieve these effects, the creators and intellectual, creative thinkers of that day made use of a technique used throughout Judaic literature—typology. The genre of typology is not often used today. In its most basic sense, typology is simply the use of prior events to provide form and context for subsequent ones—similar to using an archetype or stereotype to create a new character in literature. The typology in the Gospels is very specific—the system uses repeating names, locations, or concepts in the same sequence. The authors of the Gospels used typology to create the impression that events from the lives of prior Hebrew prophets were types of events from Jesus’ life. In doing so, it would appear they were trying to convince their readers that their story of Jesus was a continuation of the divine relationship that existed between the Hebrew prophets and God. Jesus was the Messiah whom the rebels were hoping God would send them. In this way, they would strip messianic Judaism of its power to spawn insurrections and continue to try and overthrow the Roman government, since the Messiah was no longer coming but had already come.
The following are the amazing parallels between Joseph and Jesus which suggests that this is the absolute greatest of miracles and truly written by the hand of God or cleaver men, priests and scribes wrote those books. And, there are many, many more parallels in the Bible but space will not allow others being shown in this book. But, with all these claims and facts you are welcome to do your own research.
Jesus and Joseph were both born through miracles. Jesus through the virgin birth, (Matthew 1:18-23) and Joseph came through Rachel’s barren womb which was opened by God (Genesis 30:22-24).
Joseph’s father loved him more than his brothers. Jesus is the beloved son and preferred one of the Father. Both are described in the Bible to be very pious men who received revelations from God. The Bible records no sin in the life of either Joseph or Jesus.
Jesus and Joseph both went to Egypt in their youth. Both began their life’s work at the age of thirty (Genesis 41:46, Luke 3:23). The course of the lives of Joseph and Jesus were dramatically changed by the power of dreams. Joseph became an interpreter of his own dreams and the dreams of others which he used to save everyone’s life including his own. It was also a dream which led Jesus’ earthly father, Joseph, to flee Israel for their lives to Egypt. In the same way, it was a dream of Joseph while acting as prince of Egypt which led his family out of Israel and into Egypt. After the danger was over, God called both Joseph’s family and Jesus’ family out of Egypt and back to Israel as an act of salvation. (Hosea 11:1 and Matthew 2:15).
Joseph and Jesus were hated because of their greatness. Joseph had a dream which made it clear that he would rule over his brothers some day and for this they hated him: “Joseph had a dream, and when he told it to his brothers, they hated him all the more. He said to them, Listen to this dream I had: We were binding sheaves of grain out in the field when suddenly my sheaf rose and stood upright, while your sheaves gathered around mine and bowed down to it. His brothers said to him, do you intend to reign over us? Will you actually rule us? And they hated him all the more because of his dream and what he had said.’” (Genesis 37:5-8)
Jesus encountered the same reaction from his brothers and everyone in town. After preaching in his own hometown, Jesus received the following response: “Isn’t this the carpenter’s son? Isn’t his mother’s name Mary, and aren’t his brothers James, Joseph, Simon and Judas? Aren’t all his sisters with us? Where then did this man get all these things? And they took offense at him. But Jesus said to them, only in his hometown and in his own house is a prophet without honor.” (Matthew 13:55-57). While the religious leaders were rejecting Jesus, even some of Jesus’ own family rejected him. In John 7:5, his own brothers asked Jesus for more signs because: “Even his own brothers did not believe in him.” (John 7:5).
Joseph and Jesus attained great authority and inspired confidence in those around them. When the famine arrived and the grain ran out in Egypt, the Pharaoh told the Egyptians: “Go to Joseph and do whatever he tells you.” (Genesis 41:55). Don’t forget there is no written record of any people or events like this taking place in Egypt and do not forget the Egyptians kept meticulous written records. Likewise, Jesus’ mother told the servants at the marriage feast in Cana to do what Jesus tells them to do when the wine runs out: “Do whatever he tells you.” (John 2:5). Joseph miraculously gave bread to the people around him because he received God’s revelation which saved the people from dying during the famine. Jesus miraculously gave bread to the people around him because he received God’s revelation which saved the people from the spiritual famine.
Joseph and Jesus were both sent by their fathers to their brothers who hated them and rejected their claim to preeminence. In the seventh chapter of Acts in the New Testament, the martyr Stephen gives a speech before he is stoned to death. In it, Stephen draws a parallel between Joseph and Jesus: “The patriarchs, jealous of Joseph, sold him into Egypt; but God was with him, and rescued him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who made him governor over Egypt and over his entire household. Also, not recorded anywhere outside the Bible. Now there came a famine throughout all Egypt and Canaan and great affliction and our fathers could find no food. But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent forth our fathers the first time. And at the second visit Joseph made himself known to his brothers, and Joseph’s family became known to Pharaoh. And Joseph sent and called to him Jacob his father and all his kindred, seventy-five souls.” (Acts 7:9-14).
Joseph was sold into Egypt on the advice of his brother Judah. Jesus was handed over to the Romans by the hand of his disciple Judas. Joseph did not utter a word to his brothers when they sold him. Jesus did not utter a word to the judges when they judged him. Joseph asked the imprisoned chief cup bearer not to forget him when he is released and reinstated at court. He said: “Be sure to remember me when things go well for you.” (Genesis 40:14). In the same words, the thief on the cross said to Jesus:
“Remember me when you come into your kingdom.” (Luke 23:42). One could even extend this parallel to include the fact that Jesus was bearing the “cup” which his Father gave him to drink in the same way the cup bearer did for the Pharaoh. Two other prisoners were with Joseph suffering the same punishment. Two other prisoners were with Jesus suffering the same punishment. In Joseph’s case, it is written: “Two other prisoners were with Joseph suffering the same punishment.” Two other prisoners were with Jesus suffering the same punishment. In Joseph’s case, it is written: “After they had been in custody for some time, each of the two men—the cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were being held in prison—had a dream the same night, and each dream had a meaning of its own.” (Genesis 40:4-5). The two prisoners told Joseph their dreams for which Joseph interpreted. As a result of these two dreams, death would come to one of the prisoners but release and exaltation for the other. In Jesus’ case, it is written that: “Two robbers were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left.” (Matthew 27:38). As it was in Joseph’s case, one prisoner would be condemned while the other prisoner would be released and find salvation: “One of the criminals who hung there hurled insults at him, ‘Aren’t you the Christ? Save yourself and us!’ But the other criminal rebuked him, ‘Don’t you fear God,’ he said, ‘since you are under the same sentence? We are punished justly, for we are getting what our deeds deserve. But this man has done nothing wrong.’ Then he said, ‘Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom.’ Jesus answered him, ‘I tell you the truth, today you will be with me in paradise.’” (Luke 23:39-43).
In persecution, Jesus and Joseph were stripped of their robes and placed in a pit for three days where they ultimately arose victorious to be great princes and became exalted by God for their great suffering. In the pre-Christian apocryphal Jewish text called “Testament of Joseph,” Joseph’s suffering is described in a way that could easily apply to Jesus as well: “My brothers hated me but the Lord loved me. They wanted to kill me but the God of my father’s preserved me. Into a cistern they lowered me, the most High raised me up. They sold me into slavery; the Lord of all set me free. I was taken into captivity, the strength of His hand set me free. I was overtaken by hunger; the Lord Himself fed me generously. I was alone and God came to help me. I was in weakness and the Lord showed His concern for me. I was in prison and the Savior acted graciously on my behalf. I was in bonds and He loosed me. Falsely accused and He testified on my behalf. Assaulted by bitter words of the Egyptians, and He rescued me. A slave, and He exalted me.” (Testament of Joseph 1:4-7). Both Joseph and Jesus were persecuted because of false witnesses. The wife of Potiphar bears false witness against Joseph before the members of her household and before her husband (Genesis 39:14-19). Witnesses falsely accused Jesus before the Sanhedrin (Matthew 26:60-62, Mark 14:55-59) and before Pilate (Matthew 27:12-14, Mark 15:3-5). Joseph went to prison because of the false witnesses. Jesus went to hell after being crucified because of false witnesses. The words “prison” and “hell” are often used interchangeably in the Bible.
Joseph’s brothers smeared his robe with goat’s blood in order to blame Joseph’s demise on wild animals. On the day of Jesus’ death, it was Passover and a goat is sacrificed for the atonement of sins. Both Joseph and Jesus were men among many brothers who rejected them but was saved by God and raised to be the judge of their brothers. This same theme can be found in Jesus’ parable of the murderous tenants in the vineyard. It is a parable which can be found in all three synoptic gospels. The parable is an important key to understanding how Jesus’ rejection and death is to be understood (see Matthew 21:33-46, Mark 12:1-11, Luke 20:9-19). In the parable, evil men plot to kill the son of the vineyard owner, saying: “This is the heir; come let us kill him and the inheritance will be ours.” (Matthew 21:38, Mark 12:7, Luke 20:14). These words are even similar to the words of Joseph’s brothers when they plotted to kill Joseph: “Come now, let’s kill him and throw him into one of these cisterns” (Genesis 37:20). Both were sold for the price of a slave. Joseph was sold for 20 shekels of silver and Jesus was sold for 30 pieces. Both were assigned with two other prisoners.
The stories of Joseph and Jesus are both a kind of “rags to riches” story. Joseph was brought out of the pit and prison to be exalted to the Pharaoh’s right hand: “Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, Since God has made all this known to you, there is no one so discerning and wise as you. You shall be in charge of my palace, and all my people are to submit to your orders. Only with respect to the throne will I be greater than you. So Pharaoh said to Joseph, I hereby put you in charge of the whole land of Egypt. Then Pharaoh took his signet ring from his finger and put it on Joseph’s finger. He dressed him in robes of fine linen and put a gold chain around his neck. He had him ride in a chariot as His second in command.” (Genesis 41:39-41).
Jesus was brought out from the pit after death and exalted to the Father’s right hand: “And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death—even death on a cross! Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on Earth and under the earth and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” (Philippians 2:8-11). The brothers of Joseph recovered his bones from Egypt and brought them to the Promised Land. God the Father of Jesus resurrected his body from Hades and brought him to heaven.
However, there is neither archaeological evidence nor any written records relating to any kind of separate settlement of religious people in Egypt during that time other than in the Bible. There is also no evidence of any kind relating to a mass migration across the Sinai Peninsula. If these things did indeed happen as it says in the Bible (and the Torah), there would have to be some archaeological evidence. But there is none. Further, there is no evidence of any kind that Egypt even used slaves, and certainly no evidence that they enslaved an entire nation. So, what is the relationship with Jesus if Joseph did not exist? Yet in the face of facts like this some of my friends will say, “I believe the Bible,” and I believe that you believe it!
Josephus
Titus Flavius Josephus (37-c. 100), also called Joseph Ben Matityahu, Yosef Ben Matityahu was a scholar who witnessed the sack of Jerusalem.
The main account of the revolt comes from Josephus, the former Jewish commander of Galilee who, after capture by the Romans, attempted to end the rebellion by negotiating with the Judeans on Titus’s behalf. Josephus and Titus became close friends, and later Josephus was granted Roman citizenship and a pension. He never returned to his homeland after the fall of Jerusalem, living in Rome as a historian under the patronage of Vespasian and Titus.
He wrote two works, The Jewish War (AD 75) and Jewish Antiquities (AD. 94) which, on occasion, are contradictory. These are the only surviving source materials containing information on specific events occurring during the fighting.
Now, let me set the context of Titus Flavius Josephus also formally called Joseph Ben Matityahu or Yosef Ben Matityahu. Remember the Jews were fighting the Roman Empire with everything they had. Thousands upon thousands of lives had been lost. It would be like today if a civil war broke out in America; African Americans against European Americans and there was war and conflict everywhere. Lives were being lost at an alarming rate. The European Americans surrounded Harlem and Malcolm X escaped, tried to negotiate a peace in which the Europeans gained everything and the African Americans were banned from Harlem and then finally Malcolm X decided he would change his name to Hoover (after J. Edgar Hoover his arch enemy in government) and write a history that was favorable to the European Americans and then was taken care of for the rest of his life, living in luxury, wouldn’t you think he had a vested interest in making sure the history he wrote was what his captors wanted? Of course Josephus is the only historian of his time to talk about Jesus as a turn the other cheek savior, not a warrior Messiah who would bring deliverance by force!
But, first things first, Josephus was not a contemporary historian. He was born in the year 37 C.E., several years after Jesus’ alleged death. There is no way he could have known about Jesus from his own personal experience. At best, he could have recorded the activities of the new cult of Christianity, and what they said about their crucified leader.
Late in the first century Josephus wrote his celebrated work, “The Antiquities of the Jews,” giving a history of his race from the earliest ages down to his own time. Modern versions of this work contain the following passage:
About this time there lived Jesus, a wise man, if indeed one ought to call him a man. For he was one who performed surprising deeds and was a teacher of such people as accept the truth gladly. He won over many Jews and many of the Greeks. He was the Messiah. And when, upon the accusation of the principal men among us, Pilate had condemned him to a cross, those who had first come to love him did not cease. He appeared to them spending a third day restored to life, for the prophets of God had foretold these things and a thousand other marvels about him. And the tribe of the Christians, so called after him, has still to this day not disappeared (Antiquities 18).
For nearly sixteen hundred years Christians and Christian historians who shape religious thought have been citing this passage as a testimonial, not merely to the historical existence, but to the divine character of Jesus Christ. Now Josephus’ work is voluminous and exhaustive. It comprises twenty books. Whole pages are devoted to petty robbers and obscure seditious leaders. Nearly forty chapters are devoted to the life of a single king. Yet this remarkable being, the greatest product of his race, a being of which the prophets foretold ten thousand wonderful things, a being greater than any earthly king, is dismissed with a dozen lines. That is highly unlikely to be how a matter of such significance would be treated; don’t you think? Also, Josephus was a Jew, a devout believer in the Jewish faith; he would the last man in the world to acknowledge the divinity of Christ unless it served the purpose of his captors. When you compare history and historical facts to the thinking process it opens the door to the many influences that shaped the final product.
Christianity was not a new and unique revelation from God but actually a Jewish reworked copy of the ancient Mystery religions of the day and ancient beliefs centered in Egypt. It may sound unbelievable at first, just as it did initially to me having been brought up in the Church. My view, gathered from numbers of sources is firmly based upon available historical sources and the latest scholarly research. Although still radical and challenging to most believers today, many of the ideas are actually far from new; in fact they are ancient. As long ago as the Renaissance, many mystics and scholars saw the origins of Christianity in the ancient Egyptian religion, I am not alone in these views; it just takes some dedication and study without fear. Are you afraid?
The following are the conclusions of Martin Luther King: There can hardly be any gainsaying of the fact that Christianity was greatly influenced by the Mystery religions, both from a ritual and a doctrinal point of view. This does not mean that there was a deliberate copying on the part of Christianity. On the contrary it was generally a natural and unconscious process rather than a deliberate plan of action. Christianity was subject to the same influences from the environment as were the other cults, and it sometimes produced the same reaction. The people were conditioned by the contact with the older religions and the background and general trend of the time.
Dr. Shirley Jackson Case has written some words that are quite apt at this point. He says: “Following the lead of the apostle Paul, the Christian missionaries on Gentile soil finally made of Christianity a more appealing religion than any of the other mystery cults. This was accomplished, not by any slavish process of imitation, but by a serious attempt to meet better the specific religious needs that the mysteries had awakened and nourished, and by phrasing religious assurances more convincingly in similar terminology. This means there have been and continue to be adaptations along the way of religious and doctrinal development.
The greatest influence of the mystery religions on Christianity lies in a different direction from that of doctrine and ritual. It lies in the fact that the mystery religions paved the way for the presentation of Christianity to the world of that time. They prepared the people mentally and emotionally to understand the type of religion which Christianity represented. They were themselves, in varying degrees, imperfect examples of the Galilean sect which was to replace them. They encouraged the movement away from the state religions and the philosophical systems and toward the desire for personal salvation and promise of immortality. Christianity was truly indebted to the mystery religions for this contribution, for they had done this part of the groundwork and thus opened the way for Christian missionary work. Many views, while passing out of “so-called,” paganism into Christianity were given a more profound and spiritual meaning by Christians, yet we must be indebted to the source. To discuss Christianity without mentioning other religions would be like discussing the greatness of the Atlantic Ocean without the slightest mention of the many tributaries that keep it flowing.
The Roman Government and the Roman Catholic Church systematically destroyed Pagan sacred literature in an atrocious program of eradicating the knowledge—a task it performed so completely that today Paganism and their sources is regarded as a “dead” religion. Although surprising to us now, to writers of the first few centuries AD these similarities between the new Christian religion and the ancient religious ideas were very obvious.
Christianity, however, some say survived because it appeared to be the result of a trend in the social order or in the historical cycle of the human race. Forces have been known to delay trends but very few have stopped them. The staggering question that arises now is what will be the next stage of man’s religious progress? Is Christianity the crowning achievement in the development of religious thought or will there be another religion more advanced?
My conclusions are somewhat different. I just want to point out that religions that carry forth original ideas from Africa do not evolve from out of thin air. The creation of any new religion makes use of the information present at the time of its new views. The question for African Americans in light of these source connections to Kemet is, will we go back and proudly look at our own creative genius and what we have given the world of religion? Or, will we continue to blindly believe what has been pasted down to us from Europeans. It was, after all mainly Europeans who decided what would be in the New Testament books called the Bible.
The greatest sin of the Christian church was the deliberate alteration of the racial and ethnic identities of Jesus Christ and his mother to satisfy emerging European racial and mental marginalization of Black people. The purpose was to take or keep Black and Brown people away from the center of attention, influence and power. Even in America, many times you better not start talking about a Black Christ and Madonna even in the Black Church where we come for ‘truth.”
The early Church fathers of Christianity and the church knew of many truths that they did not want Christian masses to know about the background history and people of the Bible. As a result, the very design of Christianity was based upon shielding the Bible from the masses. This resulted in the true power of the Church being consolidated with the Priest Craft. Until the Reformation the Bible was behind closed doors, secluded and its content was known to only a few in the church. These priests were clandestinely trained and taught to teach the Bible only in the manner prescribed by the church. Even when the Bible became available to the masses, the Catholic Church still argued that the Bible is so complex that the masses would not understand it so they still needed train people to interpret the Bible to them.
The missionary teachers told African and other converts around the world that they needed new European names. We were told that we were being Christianized. These missionaries were not set on Christianizing any African or wherever they took the Bible, they were secretly Europeanizing converts.
Many White people know what they’re talking about is false but they want us to believe it anyway. For them to be successful in what they want to do, they need our future. They need our sons and daughters; they need our children. They need you and others like you because they work on our minds. If you give these missionaries your head, you will never be like them and the saddest part is you will never be yourself. You will never even know who you are. Europeans give us certificates, diplomas, and degrees and we are walking around proud that we are the new generation of African American Europeans.
Where were these people when our ancestors were creating wisdom? How can the origin of the book believed to be the greatest book of religious truths be kept secret from the millions that believe in this book called the Bible? What amazes me and some scholars who study the Bible is the fact that no one dares to question where the Bible came from. Centuries of carefully designed strategies to confer sacredness and divinity to the Bible, has resulted in most Christians coming to believe that the Bible is the final authority on thinking, reasoning, and life. As a result, all thinking and reasoning stop for many people as soon as the Bible is invoked in any discussion. People do not know how to proceed in a discussion anymore once the Bible has been quoted in support of any debate.
When we look at the Bible from a geographical point of view, we find out that geographically, the Jewish people became a people in ancient Egypt not in Canaan. They became a people in ancient Egypt before they moved to Canaan. The documents of the Bible were compiled and translated for the Greeks in ancient Egypt. All of these suggest that the true story behind the Bible and Christianity can never be known and understood without knowing about the people that lived in ancient Egypt and in the Middle East in ancient times.
Early White apostolate fathers of the church would have no reason to portray Jesus and his mother as Black people if they were not originally Black. The early portrayal of Jesus and his mother as Black people was therefore the gospel truth. That was why the church portrays Jesus and his mother in the original Black images of the Jewish people at the time. Jesus’ mother and the people of the Bible are significant because the Catholic Church introduced Christianity to Western Europe. This revelation not only confirms that the Catholic Church has long known and acknowledged the African origin of Christianity but also that White Europeans have long known, accepted, and acknowledged that the Black heritage of Jesus, his mother, and her people. Most of the churches removed all the Black figurines of Jesus and his mother from the churches and European public view and replace them with White images. This was how the earliest images of Jesus and his mother came to be Black in the Catholic churches of Europe. The church worshiped the Black images of Jesus and his mother in all Catholic churches in Europe for over 1000 years.
The knowledge meant Black people are the people of the Bible and the creators of the doctrines of Christianity began from the formative years of Christianity and lasted until the racism and racial prejudice made it psychologically impossible and uncomfortable for Europeans to accept a Black Jesus and his Black mother. What is interesting about this is the Black figurines of Christ and his mother were not thrown away or destroyed. They’re kept in secret basements and repositories.
These were some of the people who broke away from ancient Egypt, and went to live in Canaan, and later went to Europe and became the Jews. Remember that the Catholic Church was closer in time to the coming of the Jews to Rome so the artists in these catacombs depicted what they saw the earliest Jewish people were, and that was Black. The New Testament states that Jesus was taken to ancient Egypt in his infancy to hide him from the murderous intentions of King Herod how could it have been possible for a blonde haired blue-eyed then knows then lipped paleface baby to have been hidden among a sea of Black faces and a land of Black people in ancient. Egypt.
The Bible and Christianity are over 2000 years old, yet Christians around the world do not know where these ideas and sacramental practices of their religion originated, and the Catholic Church that has known the foundations of these has refused to tell them. Most people when questioned about the origin of the documents and ideas of the Bible say that God wrote them. Most Christians do not want to be asked questions that would make them think beyond what the Bible wants them to know and believe.
Most Christians today would never believe that the concepts and ideas presented in the biblical documents belong to the ancient Egyptians or even that the biblical documents were compiled and translated for the Greeks in ancient Egypt by Jews. It is a fact that the earliest and greatest collection of religious texts were in ancient Egypt not in Israel. Because such documents were created in ancient Egypt, archaeologists have found evidence of them in ancient Egypt.
Unfortunately because the biblical documents were not created in Israel, no evidence of such documents has so far been found in Israel. All documents that come from Israel and others found around Israel have all been dated from second century documents the originals have never been found. It becomes clear why the Jewish scholars of Alexandria had to bring priests in Israel to ancient Egypt to help them compile, edit and translate the documents that became the first Bible.
The Greek Bible the concepts and practices of salvation and resurrection through religion were invented in ancient Egypt and they were major parts of the ancient Egyptian religion, beliefs, and practices for thousands of years before they became the doctrines and beliefs in Christianity.
Anyone who reads these ancient Egyptian Theosophical ideas today would think they came out of the Bible because they are exactly the same. Anyone who knows the Bible would immediately notice the striking similarities between this ancient Egyptian and biblical documents pertaining to the concept of God. Why would the writers and compliers of the Biblical texts guide you away from Egypt? Why are you led to believe that God had turned his back on Egypt? Why is the Pharaoh portrayed as an evil task master? Do these facts, concepts and documents that already existed in ancient Egypt before Jewish scholars went there to compile such documents for the Greeks suggest in any way that the biblical concepts and documents were taken from older ancient Egyptian ideas and documents? Is there any doubt that these Jewish scholars of Alexandria took the ideas of God, religion, and sacramental practices that became Christianity from the ancient Egyptians?
What is most interesting about Christianity today is that no one wants its members or believers to find out the source of the ideas and doctrines of their faith and where they originated. As a result, Christianity has succeeded in teaching many if not all believers that anything outside the Bible is a lie. It was from these foundations in Egypt that the concepts of all religions emerged out of Africa. The presence of ancient Egypt in matters of religion of the world can therefore not be denied, distorted, or aborted any longer. The Jewish scholars of the Bible at Alexandria did not have anybody of religious documents ready to translate for the Greeks. There is no historical, biblical, or literary evidence of when, where, or how the authors of the Old Testament beginning from Moses wrote the books attributed to them.
Most believers in the Bible have never seen or much less studied ancient Egyptian history or religious literature so they have never known that there was a source in ancient Egypt from which the biblical documents could have been taken. Much of what scholars of ancient Egypt know and find out is tucked away in libraries and museums where most Christians never look for religious explanations clarifications, or enlightenment.
The question is; why would the Bible and classic traditions conspire to distort ancient Egyptian civilization and history? What would be gained? Listen, ancient Egyptians invented the foundations of modern civilization. They invented religion, God’s, monotheism, agriculture, mining, manufacturing, engineering, transportation, Postal Service, commerce, finance, education, schools of government, paper and ink, writing systems, books, libraries, acclimate, science, mathematics, astronomy, calendars, anatomy, physiology, medicine, surgery, hygiene, added agriculture, painting, music, art, sculpture, philosophy, and every possible concept that has made our modern civilization possible. In our era racism and racial prejudice, Western Europe in particular cannot concede such great achievements to the ancient Egyptians and therefore Africans. As a result, Western Europe has insisted that his civilization came from Greece and Greek civilization and did not come out of ancient Egypt and we as Black people celebrate their idea of history to the extent that we will burn Greek letters into our skin and celebrate Greek societies and be extremely proud of it and have no knowledge of our own history and its greatness.
The Reformation
In 1514, Pope Leo X issued a papal bull forbidding all Western European countries from interfering in Portuguese foreign land. Pope Leo X also gave the Portuguese merchants the Catholic Church’s formal permission to openly take Africans as slaves because they were pagans. Portugal and Spain were both catholic nations and the Catholic Church benefited greatly from the foreign plunder and exploitations of these two countries. The Pope and the Catholic Church did not want the benefits it got to spread across all Europe so it refused to let the rest of Western Europeans in. After three years of negotiations with the Catholic Church the rest of Western Europe decided to break away in what is called the reformation.
The history of the circumstances that led to the Reformation has been told from the perspective of Europe and Western historians. They have told the story as a glorious religious revolution. However there was nothing religious or glorious about the real causes of the Reformation.
The Reformation did indeed break some Western European nations from the Catholic Church but the religious aspect of the story has nothing to do with the real economic reasons behind the Reformation. The Reformation was secretly and deeply motivated by economic greed closely linked to the plunder of gold and the enslavement of Africans in the Gold Coast. Breaking away from the Catholic Church was the only way they could get around the Catholic Churches political and economic favoritism of Portugal and Spain. Looking at the history of the Reformation in Europe alone, historians have told the world that the Reformation was a glorious religious revolution. However looking at the Reformation from its subsequent history and spillover into Africa, the Reformation was nothing but a revolution to get Western Europeans the freedom to join in the plunder of Africa’s human and mineral resources. The Reformation gave Western Europeans the religious and political freedom to pursue their economic motivations and also to open the way up for them to rush into foreign lands.
After the Reformation, almost every Western European nation rushed to the Gold Coast and sought to be part or even control the trade in gold and unsuspecting humans. There were the Portuguese, Dutch, French, English, German, Danes and Swedes all in the Gold Coast searching for gold and slaves. As more Europeans became involved in the exploitation of Africa’s human and natural resources, the propaganda against African people in Europe to justify European atrocities in Africa grew. Most scholars do not know that Christianity, especially the Catholic and Protestant churches, laid the foundations for all the race perceptions Renaissance scholars came to spread.
It was the Christian European church that first asserted that Black people were the descendents of Ham and therefore were cursed for Europeans to enslave them. This meant that it was all right for Christians in Europe to have African slaves because it was ordained in the Bible. Western historians have told the story of the Trans Atlantic slave trade as if it had nothing to do with Christianity or the Catholic Church. If the Catholic Church as the most powerful political, social, economic, and spiritual institution of Europe did not legitimize the slave trade, this unconscionable trade in humans could not have gone on for centuries.
It is not my intent to shake anyone’s faith. I too am a Christian. My main point is to show a direct connection to the ancient thoughts of Black people regarding religious, spiritual and scientific thought. I believe my efforts will expose the genius and intelligence of a great race of people hidden from the minds of Black people of today. This knowledge is the foundation for all following religions. The formation of a new religion does not happen without adopting the knowledge of religious thought of the time. Any fairly new religion today, for example Jehovah’s Witnesses did not come to fruition with its thousands of followers through an independent complete revelation of divine truth. It started with an idea and continued to develop from views present at the time of these new views being developed.
Religion
People are believers in their own religion because when they begin to act different within the dictates of their particular religion they adopt a new way of life. The new way of life is really adherence to divine law. You reap what you sow, what comes out of you comes back to you multiplied or Karma. These invisible laws give people within their religion a different set of results. As they change their thinking, action and behavior, they encounter different consequences and are then convinced that they are in the right religion.
I would like you to consider something important before we go any further. Do you think of America as a Christian nation? Do you think of Christianity as a single religion? Well, suppose for a moment that we lived in the future and America and its religious ideas are being looked at the way archeologists, historians and theologians have looked at Egypt. What kind of ideas would you have about America? Would you think that America had one Christian religion or would you think something else? Let’s just take a look at what you would find:
Protestants (about 9000 denominations)
The largest of these out of 318 million total Protestants. The Lutherans (61 million members, 253 denominations), next are Baptist-Pentecostal (49 million members, 396 denominations), followed by Baptists (48 million members, 322 denominations), Reformed/Presbyterian (44 million members, 300 denominations), Methodists (23 million members, 123 denominations), United church (22 million members, 54 denominations), Lutheran/Reformed united (15 million members, 24 denominations), and various Adventist groups (11 million members, 218 denominations). From these are formed nearly 9000 Protestant Christian denominations. Someone might complain about the “Oneness” of these groups being included since some of them reject the Holy Trinity (one God in three distinct Persons) and the historic Creeds.
Independents (about 22,000 denominations)
Let’s take a closer look at this since this is the largest mega-bloc (22000+ “denominations” of the total 33000+). These are broken down into various large groups. I’m not going to type all of these since the list is quite long—much longer than any of the groupings in the other mega-blocs which are listed below in full. But I think you will get the idea. You could easily conclude that America was a polytheist country. Or put another way, that America worshiped many Gods or no God. They worshiped statues as Gods, etc.
Marginal Dominations (about 1600 denominations)
The “Marginal Christian” groups include Jehovah’s Witnesses, Mormons, various “Arian” or pseudo-Christian cults, some Christian science or “mind science” cults, some Unitarian/Universalist groups, and tiny numbers of so-called Christian or Catholic “Gnostics.”
From these are formed nearly 1600 “denominations.” The largest of these are the Jehovah Witnesses (11 million members,), next are the Mormons (8 million members,), and far behind are the “metaphysical” science cults (1.1 million members, 59 denominations), etc. I’ll agree most of these are very borderline “Christian.” They might refer to “Jesus Christ” and use the Bible in their “worship services” but for the most part they reject the historic Creeds and Councils of Christendom (Nicene, Athanasius, Ephesus, Chalcedon, etc). However, the numbers here are small compared with the numbers of Independent and Protestant denominations.
Roman Catholics (242 denominations)
The largest is by far the Latin-rite (commonly called “Roman Catholics” by non-Catholic Christians) with 976 million members of the 994 million total members (or 98% of the total). However, since virtually all of these western and smaller eastern rites are in union with the Pope, there is actually one Catholic Church, not 242 churches or denominations.
Anglicans (168 denominations)
Anglo-Catholic
Central or Broad Church Anglican
Ecumenical (Anglican/Protestant/Orthodox joint parishes)
Anglican Evangelical, Evangelical Anglican
High Church Anglican (Prayer Book Catholic)
Low Church Anglican (Conservative Evangelical)
Anglican, of plural or mixed traditions
World Totals (33000+ Denominations)
So, when you look at America through the imaginary lens of time the way we actually look back at other ancient cultures, your conclusions would be different. You might easily think that Christianity was polytheistic, violent and prone to worship of statues or idols; in fact you could look at America and say that is was a combination of numerous beliefs.
How did Christianity become
so powerful?
When we think of how powerful Christianity is today, do we question how this particular religion became so powerful? Let us just look at one of the ways Christianity forged its way forward barging its way past any other religious thought. Let us look at how people were convinced, persuaded and herded into, “believing.”
In 1320 the inquisition added witchcraft to its list of heresies. Many styles of torture had been invented during the inquisition so as to inflict the most horrific pain on the poor victim without killing them. The worst of these were turned upon those accused of witchcraft.
Pope Innocent VIII, in his papal bull Summis Desiderantes (December 5, 1484), instigated severe measures against magicians and witches in Germany. The grip of freezing weather, failing of crops, rising crime, and mass starvation was blamed on witches.
With pope innocent VIII issuance of his papal bull against witches in 1484, the torture of people accused of being a witch reached fanatical proportions. The worst of the tortures of the inquisition occurred in Germany and France. Now you might think this is crazy based on today’s norms. However, this method was quite effective in getting people to conform to the “Churches,” view.
Millions of innocent people were tortured and murdered during the inquisition. The inquisitors followed procedures set forth by the Dominican monks of Pope Innocent VIII. At first the poor accused were told to confess. They were then stripped naked, shaved, pricked with needles for insensitive spots and then examined for marks of the devil.
Before the torture started, the victim was told what was about to happen and in many cases this forced the accused to commit to whatever the inquisitors wanted.
It was noted that a person who refused to talk even under torture was being aided by the devil. While the poor victim was being tortured a clerk recorded what was said. In many cases the clerk recorded things that were not even said.
Each subsequent round of torture was much worse than the one before. The torturer was paid out of seized funds belonging to the victim. If the victim had no money then the relatives were made to pay.
While the poor victims screamed with pain the hideous “religious” tortures, the servants of the Church carried on like sadistic maniacs. They sprayed there instruments with so called holy water, wore amulets, herbs and crossed themselves. The exact method of torture varied from place to place. The rack was well used in France during the inquisition.
Some victims were horsewhipped. A sharp iron fork was used to mangle breasts. Red hot pincers were used to tear off flesh. Red hot irons were inserted up vaginas and rectums. A device named the turcas was used to tear out fingernails.
After the nails were ripped out needles were shoved into the quicks of the skin where the nails used to be. Boots called bootikens were used to lacerate flesh and crush bone. Thumbscrews were used to crush the fingers and toes. Acid was poured on victims and hands were immersed into pots of boiling oil and water.
Eyes were gouged out by irons. Alcohol was poured on the head of the poor victim and set alight. Water was poured down the victim’s throat with a knotted cloth. The cloth was then jerked out tearing up the victims bowels.
There was no limit to the types and cruelty of the tortures. The inquisition meant anything was allowed. The inquisitors were sadistic and cruel beyond imagination.
Even after the poor victims confessed to things they never did more torture was to follow. On the way to the stake or gallows victims were flogged, burned, branded and had their hands and tongues hacked off. By the 17th century as the Catholic Church began to lose power the inquisition began to collapse. Millions had died as a result of the inquisition, including men, women, children and babies.
These methods were employed for hundreds of years. It is no wonder that any other thoughts or religious ideas had any chance of advancing in the face of such brutal behavior. And, let me add here that after the collection of books later to be called the Bible was created in Alexandria Africa, force and governmental power was used to convince the common people to adopt it. The following is a look at how long these practices continued. Any and all of them lasted longer that the United States is old. Can you imagine that taking place in America and continuing until today? Don’t forget as you look at these dates that much of what happened occurred after the “discovery” of the new world of America.
1. The Medieval Inquisition (1231 AD-16th century) 369 years
2. The Spanish Inquisition (1478-1834 AD) 356 years
3. The Portuguese Inquisition (1536-1821 AD) 285 years
4. The Roman Inquisition (1542-c. 1860 AD) 318 years
Papal infallibility is a dogma of the Catholic Church which states that, by action of the Holy Spirit, the pope is preserved from even the possibility of error. Don’t forget, people were tortured and pressured into believing and adopting this belief system. So, let me ask you a question. Do you believe this is God’s will or the will of men being imposed on people?
Individual Catholic missionaries such as the Jesuits, who also owned slaves, worked to alleviate the suffering of Native American slaves in the New World. Debate about the morality of slavery continued throughout this period, with some books critical of slavery being placed on the Index of Forbidden Books by the Holy Office between the years of 1573-1826 AD. Thus, suppression of any true meaning of loving their fellow man was not the intent of the Church leaders. It was all about power, the lust for gold and exploitation by European powers of any native populations they found.
Giordano Bruno was an Italian Dominican friar, philosopher, mathematician and astronomer. His cosmological theories proposed that the Sun was essentially a star, and that the universe contained an infinite number of inhabited worlds populated by other intelligent beings. He was burned at the stake by civil authorities in 1600 after the Roman Inquisition found him guilty of heresy.
In 1517, Martin Luther, a German Augustinian priest, challenged Roman Catholic doctrine. Luther was criticizing a common church practice of the day, the selling of indulgences. In Catholic theology, an indulgence was the full or partial remission of temporal punishment due for sins which have already been forgiven. In other words you had to pay for sins which had already been forgiven, in short a money making scheme. The dilemma was that the common people did not have access to the, “Holy Scriptures.” Therefore they had to rely on the voice of the Church to know, “what thus saith the Lord.”
The New Testament was not completed and printed in 1514, but its publication was delayed while work on the Old Testament continued, so they could be published together as a complete work. The Old Testament was completed in 1517. Publication was delayed until Pope Leo X could sanction it in 1520. It is believed to have not been distributed widely before 1522. So, until that happened people were guided by the dictates of men with power masquerading behind robes of righteousness.
The Role of Africans in Adopting Christianity
Egyptians before Christianity had always been a deeply spiritual and religious people, and many readily embraced the young Christian religion, having had their old beliefs effectively destroyed by the coming of the Roman Empire and the final dethroning of the god-king Pharaohs. Many of the concepts of Christianity were already familiar to the Egyptians from their own ancient religion, such as the death and resurrection of a god, the idea of a trinity, Ausar/Aset/Heru, the idea of the judgment of souls and a paradise afterlife for the faithful. God molding man from clay, God breathing the breath of life into man’s nostrils, the idea that creation was by the spoken word and the idea of hell and hell fire, baptism and circumcision. The ankh too, the Egyptian symbol for eternal life, is very similar to that of the cross revered by Christians, it is however a symbol of eternal life not death. Furthermore, the belief that God had chosen Egypt as a safe place for His infant son to hide him from Herod was a great source of pride to the Egyptian Christians. It was through Christianity that the Egyptian culture survived the Roman Dominion.
Europeans started conquering the outside world through colonization of countries and spreading knowledge including their version of world history which was in their total control. The sad thing is that a large amount of our ‘Egyptology’ has been molded by Judeo-Christian, anti Egyptian and anti Black prejudice. The Western fascination with Egypt is largely based on Biblical accounts of interaction between the Hebrews and this ancient land. Their “view” is the Hebraic view; it is largely negative toward Egypt. Some Academic Egyptologists have make their living by degrading the Egyptians and their beliefs. The historical arena is infested by those whose only intention is to destroy the credibility of ancient Egypt and Black people in particular.
As long as academic Egyptology prevails, children will be brought up with a totally distorted view of our human past, and by extension, of our human present. Kemet was an advanced state of intellectual, cultural, and material development in human society, marked by progress in the arts and sciences, the extensive use of writing, and the appearance of complex political and social institutions.
All kinds of information should be valued, but the information on the origins of humanity and the metaphysics of spiritual evolution are both feared and intimidating to those who study Egypt and perhaps more particularly the orthodox Egyptologists, because this very powerful information truly changes everything, from the concept of human origins to what life is all about. It brings the whole Western historical form under examination. Reflect on what would happen if those people in positions of authority as well as lay people in religions, governments and schools were suddenly faced with the realization that their knowledge is incomplete, and that ordinary people begin to understand that they are higher beings who should not be taken advantage of. This is the power of understanding the glory and truth about Ancient Egypt. All humanity, not just Africans or Europeans, can be transformed through it, for the better, to bring about a world culture based on solidarity and common purpose.
Persecution
In the beginning the greatest persecutions on the young Christian religion came at the hands of the Roman government. Emperor Nero had set the precedent in AD 64, about the same time as the martyrdom of Saint Peter. The actual offense was simply to be a Christian or to profess the Christian faith, rather than any kind of criminal acts. An arrested Christian could receive a pardon simply by offering incense on a Roman altar, but many refused to do so, citing scripture passages urging faith in the one God. Those who did refuse to bow to the Roman religion were imprisoned, often tortured, thrown to the wild animals in the coliseum, or suffered execution by any number of other means. Rather than discouraging the Christians, these actions encouraged them and reinforced their faith. So with that as a backdrop of understanding and after 263 years of torture and no change in the believers, I am sure those in power wondered, then what kind of power is this? No wonder some wanted to control this religious belief.
Constantine, though he himself was not baptized a Christian until his deathbed saw that opportunity for power and control and seized it in pulling different beliefs of the day into one. Constantine’s declaration to make Christianity the official religion of the empire had two immediate effects on Egypt. Firstly, it allowed the Church to enhance the organization of its administrative structure and to acquire considerable wealth; and secondly, it allowed Christian fanatics to destroy the native Egyptian religious rights, properties, and temples. A wave of destruction swept over the land of Egypt. Tombs were ravaged, walls of ancient monuments defaced, and statues toppled. The famed Library of Alexandria, which contained hundreds of thousands of documents, was destroyed.
Slavery
The Catholic nations under the direct orders and direction of the Popes were responsible for the beginning of slavery and the genocide of the African people. For two hundred years, 1440-1640, Portugal had a monopoly on the export of slaves from Africa. The Protestant Dutch and the English nations made slavery a system of cold uncaring big business thus setting the stage for the industrial revolution which dominated in the 18th and 19th centuries. It is estimated that during the 4 1/2 centuries of the trans-Atlantic slave trade, Portugal was responsible for transporting over 4.5 million Africans (roughly 40% of the total). During the eighteenth century, when the slave trade accounted for the transport of a staggering 6 million Africans, Britain was one of the worst transgressors; they were responsible for almost 2.5 million souls snatched from their families. This is a fact often forgotten by those who regularly cite Britain’s prime role in the closing down of the slave trade.
The slave trade holocaust is the single most appalling crime in the world committed against a people. Slaves were needed on plantations and for mines and the majorities were shipped to Brazil, the Caribbean, and the Spanish Empire. Less than 5% traveled to the Northern American States formally held by the British. Nothing else can match this massive genocide and destruction of human beings. European scholars, researchers, even anthropologists and historians always seem to keep under lock and key themselves in their writings about Indians, Native Indians and Africans to the periphery of civilization describing them all as underdeveloped and not being able to cope with the complexities of civilization.
Christopher Columbus
To your possible surprise, Christopher Columbus is a symbol of exploitation, murder and greed. For four hundred years you have been grotesquely lied to and have been fed fabrications regarding one of the greatest stories ever told. He afterward became a role model for later European conquerors. He raped and pillaged the Americas. Into this land of innocent native people came the Spaniards and they immediately behaved like ravening wild beasts, wolves, tigers, or lions that had been starved for countless days. The Spaniards came, killing, terrorizing, afflicting, torturing, and destroying the native peoples they encountered. They did all this with the strangest and most wide-ranging new methods of brutality, ever seen or heard of before. It was done to such a degree that this Island of Hispaniola once so full of people having a population estimated to be more than three million was reduced to a population of barely two hundred persons.
The true story of Columbus’ atrocities against indigenous American people was preserved and published by a Catholic cleric, Bartolomé de las Casas. He detailed the murders of the natives in his book on “The History of the Indies.” Slavery and genocide were institutionalized and systematized into a global system of dominance, devastation and death which not only controlled land, labor and resources but more importantly colonized information.
The Columbus anniversary is a celebration of mass murder and slavery. It exalts the continuing oppression of billions of people today by hiding the truth. Africans and indigenous Americans had committed no crimes against European people and did not know of the Europeans intentions to conquer and enslave them. As trusting by nature both Africans and the indigenous Americans Americas befriended the Europeans at first only to be rewarded by enslavement. One of our failings today is to not recognize that their methods do not change. They intend to conquer any situation and bend it to their advantage, through violence if necessary. The Africans and the “Indians” did not protect themselves from the Europeans because they did not believe there was a need to.
Even today while Jews study what happened to them in Germany with whole departments of scholars dedicated to exploring every detail of their holocaust, we still send our children to a European based educational system which excludes the important facts that exposes Europeans and their motives. So, we are still being deceived today based on our mis-eduaction. Columbus was a thief, invader and organizer and a reactionary religious extremist and the personal administrator of a crusade for the mass murder of defenseless, powerless and many times innocent people.
Columbus did not discover a lost or unknown land. There was a flourishing civilization of natives who lived where he first landed. The primary group was the Arawak/Taino Indians. The Arawak/Taino society was basically a very gentle culture. It was characterized by happiness, friendliness and a highly organized hierarchical, paternal society, and a lack of deceitfulness.
The Arawak/Taino Indians were the natives whom Christopher Columbus encountered when he first arrived in the Americas in 1492. The Spanish described them as a peaceful primitive people. Christopher Columbus reports in his personal diary that when he arrived in the Americas he was totally amazed. The Arawak people, with curiosity and joy, came to greet the people coming off the ships from Europe. The Arawaks, whom Columbus mistakenly thought were Indians, were a peaceful people, by all accounts, willing to share anything they had, offering both emotional kindness and their physical objects. Columbus took time to describe how remarkable these people were. So innocent of weapons and violence, the Arawak people would initially reach out their hands to feel the strange, shiny objects called swords. Can you imagine finding a paradise like this? To slaughter and reduce to slavery these innocent people is a national shame. Now, can you see why all children are taught an almost completely sanitized version of history regarding Christopher Columbus? It is all about keeping the image of Europeans pure and innocent.
The Arawak/Taino Indians lived in small scattered villages, sometimes near the sea, sometimes on a hill a few miles from the sea. They were ruled by their chief, who was their law-maker, their judge, and their chief priest. The chief inherited his position and was greatly respected by his tribe, whom he ruled with gentleness, courtesy, and firmness, for all villagers had to obey his commands.
The Indians, Columbus reported, “are so naive and so free with their possessions that no one who has not witnessed them would believe it. When you ask for something they have, they never say no. To the contrary, they offer to share with anyone… .” Arawak men and women, naked and full of wonder, emerged from their villages onto the island’s beaches and swam out to get a closer look at the strange big boat. When Columbus and his sailors came ashore, carrying swords, speaking oddly and the Arawak people ran to greet them, brought them food, water, gifts.
Columbus wrote that they brought us parrots and balls of cotton and spears and many other things, which they exchanged for the glass beads and hawks’ bells. They willingly traded everything they owned. They were well-built, with good bodies and handsome features. They do not bear arms, and do not know them, for I showed them a sword, they took it by the edge and cut themselves out of ignorance. I kept my eyes open and tried to find out if there was any gold, and I saw that some of them had a little piece hanging from a hole in their nose. I gathered from their signs that if one goes south, or around the south side of the island, there is a king with great jars full of it, enormous amounts. I tried to persuade them to go there, but I saw that the idea was not to their liking. They have no iron. Their spears are made of cane. They would make fine servants. With fifty men one could keep the whole population in subjection and make them do whatever one wanted.
The Arawak people would only work for a few hours out of a day, spending the rest of their time relaxing, socializing, and creating their culture in the ways that people most enjoy. Columbus also tells of how the Arawaks had no idea of personal shame, being able to walk around naked or make love whenever they pleased. With the tiny amount of gold on their island, they fashioned jewelry to adorn themselves. As with many other pre-contact indigenous groups, the Arawaks essentially lived in Utopia.
Could Americans be thankful for living in a utopian society where all are equal? Are we thankful for having destroyed this whole civilization? Should we be grateful for having so many deadly weapons now? These are uncomfortable facts and questions but, it is these facts and questions which need to be exposed and brought to bear on our national consciousness. Without this proper view of history America fails to treat Indians, Blacks and Browns with equality. There is always the claim of equality, fairness and the American way, however it is a struggle and a battle to move forward met with the same old resistance toward people of color.
Today, millions of people spend thousands of dollars for a precious couple of weeks of vacation trying to experience modern conditions resembling these ancient ones. Columbus could have gone back to Europe, exposing the wonders of the Arawak society and urging that the best minds of Europe go to visit and study the Arawaks to improve the welfare of Europeans. Europeans could have then incorporated aspects of Arawak society into their own, modeling what they found.
But, of course, Columbus did none of these things. Columbus wrote in his diary that with fifty men he could enslave the entire population and capture all their gold. As a result of that kind of thinking, the so-called and renamed savage Arawak people were enslaved, many were tortured, their labor exploited, and their wealth stolen and shipped off to Europe. During this process of tremendous mistreatment, men had their hands chopped off, women had their breasts sliced and their pregnant bellies cut open, babies were thrown into the air, sometimes crashing to the ground and other times being impaled on those strange, shiny swords, presumably all in the name of Christianity, civilization, and, eventually, Capitalism. The Arawaks were literally exploited to death and they are now extinct, all of them having been killed off through virulent brutality, overwork, and disease.
To have power over these defenseless people led to total and brutal cruelty. The Spaniards “thought nothing of knifing Indians by tens and twenties and of cutting slices off them to test the sharpness of their blades.” The eyewitness to these atrocities, Las Casas tells how “two of these so-called Christians met two Indian boys one day, each carrying a parrot; they took the parrots and for fun beheaded the boys.” Don’t forget as you read this that these are eye witness accounts.
Any attempt at the Indians endeavor to defend themselves failed. And when they ran off into the hills they were tracked down, found and killed. Las Casas reports, “They suffered and died in the mines and other labors in desperate silence, knowing not a soul in the world to whom they could turn for help.”
Listen to this description of how mountains are stripped from top to bottom and bottom to top a thousand times; they dig, split rocks, move stones, and carry dirt on their backs to wash it in the rivers, while those who wash gold stay in the water all the time with their backs bent so constantly it breaks them; and when water invades the mines, the most arduous task of all is to dry the mines by scooping up pans full of water and throwing it up outside… .
After each six or eight months’ work in the mines, which was the time required of each crew to dig enough gold for melting, up to a third of the men died. While the men were sent many miles away to the mines, the wives remained to work the soil, forced into the excruciating job of digging and making thousands of hills for cassava plants.
“Husbands and wives were together only once every eight or ten months and when they met they were so exhausted and depressed on both sides… they ceased to procreate. As for the newly born, they died early because their mothers, overworked and famished, had no milk to nurse them, and for this reason, while I was in Cuba, 7000 children died in three months. Some mothers even drowned their babies from sheer desperation… . In this way, husbands died in the mines, wives died at work, and children died from lack of milk… and in a short time this land which was so great, so powerful and fertile… was depopulated… . My eyes have seen these acts so foreign to human nature, and now I tremble as I write… .”
When he arrived on Hispaniola in 1508, Las Casas says, “there were 60,000 people living on this island, including the Indians; so that from 1494 to 1508, over three million people had perished from war, slavery, and the mines. Who in future generations will believe this? I myself writing it as a knowledgeable eyewitness can hardly believe it… .”
Thus began the history, five hundred years ago, of the European invasion of the Indian settlements in the Americas. That beginning, when you read Las Casas-even if his figures are exaggerations (were there 3 million Indians to begin with, as he says, or less than a million, as some historians have calculated, or 8 million as others now believe?) is conquest, slavery and death on a massive scale. When we read the history books given to children in the United States, it all starts with heroic adventure of Columbus, there is no bloodshed, and Columbus Day is a celebration.
Back on San Salvador, the Spaniards continued their assault on the Arawaks by forcing them to work on plantation like estates. The Arawaks, obviously not satisfied with this arrangement attempted a resistance but although they significantly outnumbered the invaders, they were outgunned by the Spaniards who had a distinct advantage with their armor, muskets, horses, and swords. The treatment of the Arawaks became even more atrocious after their unsuccessful revolt with the Spaniards using them as litters to carry their Spanish conquerors from place to place and maiming and killing them at random.
Christopher Columbus laid the foundation for Western racism and misconceptions about people along with the far-reaching use of well thought-out religions ideas as a rationale for the enslavement of people. This is a re-occurring incident in history and it holds us captive as nothing has held us before. What we are dealing with now is the concept that has taken hold of the mind of most of the world. People are prisoners to that concept throughout the world and are now fighting to get away from that idea of might makes right. Europeans had the ships and the basic technology so that they felt they had the right to go into other people countries and exploit their mineral resources, take their women and rape them at will. They did all of this in the name of a God that they said was merciful and kind.
Are Americans generally aware of what happened to the Arawaks? No, most people in America celebrate an imaginary image of history created especially for public consumption. These people were viewed as a resource to be used at the disposal of the Spanish people; the Arawak were viewed with no more regard than a head of cattle or a favorite horse.
But, this is the brutal truth, trying to put together an army of resistance, the Arawaks faced Spaniards who had armor, muskets, swords, horses. When the Spaniards took prisoners they hanged them or burned them to death. Among the Arawaks, mass suicides began, with cassava poison. Infants were killed to save them from the Spaniards. In two years, through murder, mutilation, or suicide, half of the 250,000 Indians on Haiti were dead.
The island of Cuba was almost completely depopulated. Puerto Rico and Jamaica are two of the largest, most productive and attractive islands; both were deserted and devastated as a result of wanton lust for gold and murder. On the northern side of Cuba and Hispaniola the neighboring sixty islands beside many other islands, some small some large were crushed under the inhuman actions of the European. When the Spaniards came the natives had the healthiest lands in the world, where lived more than five hundred thousand souls, they were left deserted. All the people that were slain or died after being taken into captivity and brought to the Island of Hispaniola were sold as slaves. When the Spaniards saw that some of these had escaped, they sent a ship to find them, and it voyaged for three years among the islands searching for those who had escaped being slaughtered. More than thirty other islands in the vicinity of San Juan were depopulated, and the land was made into a wasteland.
The natives of that land had been given an impossible task, produce gold in quantity. They ordered all persons fourteen years or older to collect a certain quantity of gold every three months. When they brought it, they were given copper tokens to hang around their necks. The natives found without a copper token had their hands cut off and bled to death. But, the only gold around was bits of dust garnered from the streams. So they fled, and were hunted down with dogs, and were killed. When it became clear that there was no gold left, the natives were taken as slave labor on huge estates. They were worked at a ferocious pace, and died by the thousands. By the year 1515, there were perhaps fifty thousand Indians left. By 1550, there were five hundred. A report of the year 1650 shows none of the original Arawaks or their descendants were left on the island.
Christopher Columbus himself never set foot in North America, but the Spanish, French, and British conquerors of North America repeated this scene when they encountered the indigenous people of that land also. Columbus wrote: “As soon as I arrived in the Indies, on the first Island which I found, I took some of the natives by force in order that they might learn and might give me information of whatever there is in these parts.” The information that Columbus wanted most was: Where is the gold?
He concluded his report by asking for a little help from their Majesties, and in return he would bring them from his next voyage “as much gold as they need… and as many slaves as they ask.” Pay close attention to this quote how he was full of religious speak: “Thus the eternal God, our Lord, gives victory to those who follow His way over apparent impossibilities.” This is one of the reasons most Americans are attached to Bibles and guns because it is gunpowder and the misuse of the collection of books called the Bible that has allowed Europeans to conquer and slaughter their fellow members of the human race.
Because of Columbus’s overstated accounts and promises, on his second voyage he was given seventeen ships and more than twelve hundred men. The intent was clear: slaves and gold. They went from island to island in the Caribbean, taking Indians as captives. But as word spread of the Europeans’ ruthless intent they found more and more empty villages. They roamed the islands in gangs looking for gold, taking women and children as slaves and for sex and labor.
The following are direct quotes, except for the spelling corrections of the La Casas material. I put these quotes in here because much of what I have written about comes from many sources with my reflections included. It would serve you well to read additional material on the subject of Columbus and his conquests. I remember growing up not knowing anything about this. Those who chose the history we studied certainly did not want this view of Europeans in the minds of growing children. Remember, what we receive from those who control education is slanted and sometimes outright lies. This is done to maintain the image of White being right and just and fair etc. Others must be labeled “savages,” to legitimize in the minds of the masses that they deserved to be brought into the so-called “light of civilization.
“[The native peoples] die or live harsher than death. They have been split into shares as if they were herds of cattle or sheep, that is, [divided] among the Spaniards and assigned by a specific number to each to become their slaves”
“The reason why the Christians have killed and destroyed such an infinite number of souls is that they have been moved by their wish for gold and their desire to enrich themselves in a very short time”
The pattern established at the outset has remained to this day, and the Spaniards still do nothing save tear the natives to shreds, murder them and inflict upon them untold misery, suffering and distress, tormenting, harrying and persecuting them mercilessly. According to Las Casas, atrocities continued unabated in the Americas, even half a century after the discovery.
Bartolomé de Las Casas (1474-1566)
Personal
When I read Bartolomé de las Casas’ book A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies, I was distressed at the brutality and graphic descriptions of what happened. The next morning I was in the living room rocking back and forth and moaning when my wife came into the room. She asked me what was the matter and it took me a moment or so to get out an answer. I know my wife does not like to hear about horrible things, so I told her she might not want to know. She insisted, wanting to know so I began to tell her what Columbus and his men had done to these poor innocent and kind people. She stopped me in very short order and said, “I don’t want to hear anymore.”
Believe me, as a person who is moved deeply by the pain of others, I just felt such an ache in my gut because of what these people and my fellow Africans suffered. It amazes me how cruel humans can be.
Haiti
Now, from his base on Haiti, Columbus sent expedition after expedition into the interior. They found no gold fields, but had to fill up the ships returning to Spain with some kind of payment. So, in the year 1495, they went on a great slave raid, rounded up fifteen hundred Arawak men, women, and children, put them in pens guarded by Spaniards and dogs, then picked the five hundred most excellent specimens to load onto ships. Of those five hundred, two hundred died en route. The rest arrived alive in Spain and were put up for sale by the arch deacon of the town, who reported that, although the slaves were “naked as the day they were born,” they showed “no more embarrassment than animals.” Columbus later wrote: “Let us in the name of the Holy Trinity go on sending all the slaves that can be sold.”
The word genocide is an attention grabbing term because it’s so far outside of what life should be and how man should treat his fellow man. It means the killing and total destruction of a whole people. The word is used when charging that some group or other is attempting genocide. Certainly Adolf Hitler and the Third Reich of Germany attempted it on the European Jews of Europe, and failed. As far as is known, the only case in history of where complete and total genocide was carried out was here in the Northern Hemisphere on the island of Hispaniola. The whole people of the Native Americans of the Arawak/Taino people were wiped out. It is a horrible and astonishing story. So when you see these pictures of Columbus and hear these stories celebrating his achievements and know the real story, we are celebrating the destruction of an entire group of people and thousands upon thousands of humans including women and children. That is why history is changed, to create a different image.
The Spaniards, with their cruel and abominable acts, devastated the land and exterminated the innocent and giving beautiful people who fully inhabited it; unbelievable horror. It is estimated that in forty years, these Christians, unjustly have slain more than twelve million men, women, and children. Eye witness accounts are believed that the number of the slain is more like fifteen million.
European observers were to say again and again that these Arawaks of the Bahamas Islands were much like Indians on the mainland, who were remarkable for their hospitality, their belief in sharing. These traits did not stand out in the Europeans of the Renaissance, dominated as it was by the religion of popes, the government of kings, and the frenzy for money that marked Western civilization and its first messenger to the Americas, Christopher Columbus.
Las Casas speaks from the past to inform us how the Spaniards “grew more conceited every day” and after a while refused to walk any distance. They “rode the backs of Indians if they were in a hurry” or were carried on hammocks by Indians running in relays. “In this case they also had Indians carry large leaves to shade them from the sun and others to fan them with goose wings.” This kind of reminds you of the Ten Commandments where Blacks were always in the background, fanning White people playing African Egyptian people. Many Europeans are proud of that image and want you today to feel and act in submission to their very presence.
The approved histories of the United States, Israel, South Africa, and Australia commonly originate with a blotting out of the true knowledge and history of the indigenous people. The image of the savage is then shaped around the conquered and subjugated aboriginal people because it then serves to rationalize European conquest. Once the natives have thus been banished from collective memory, at least as people of numerical and cultural significance, the Europeans moral and intellectual right to conquest is claimed to be established without question. And, the general spiritual and religious view is, it must be God’s will.
The treatment of heroes (Columbus) and their victims (the Arawaks), the quiet acceptance of conquest and murder in the name of progress is only one aspect of a certain approach to history, in which the past is told from the point of view of governments, conquerors, diplomats and leaders. It is as if they, like Columbus, deserve universal acceptance. It is as if there really is a “national interest” represented in the Constitution, in territorial expansion, in the laws passed by Congress, the decisions of the courts, the development of capitalism, the culture of education and the mass media despite the theft, brutality and lies used to obtain and maintain conquest.
The Puritans also appealed to the Bible, using this and other scriptures to legitimize their actions: Psalms 2:8: “Ask of me, and I shall give thee, the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.” And to justify their use of force to take the land, they cited Romans 13:2: “Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.”
Today the United States of America has, by far, the most expensive and prevailing military on Earth, it also has a high poverty rate, the largest prison population, a comparatively high infant mortality rate, incredible overconsumption and waste, a stingy and demeaning welfare program, an active capital punishment program, and more privately owned guns than people.
There are many reasons to celebrate America and Americans have a lot to be thankful for. Genocide should not be one of those things celebrated and that is why the truth is suppressed. What we should be praying for is forgiveness and true help to create a country that the world could be proud of. Do not think for one moment that others are not aware of the White European mind set when it comes to a world view?
When we look at American history more closely we find four hundred years, from the first Spanish assaults against the Arawak people of Hispaniola in the 1490s to the U.S. Army’s massacre of Sioux Indians at Wounded Knee in the 1890s, the indigenous inhabitants of North and South America endured an unending firestorm of violence. During that time the native population of the Western Hemisphere declined by as many as 100 million people.
Christopher Columbus and
King Leopold II
King Leopold II of Belgium “owned” the Congo during his reign as the constitutional monarch of Belgium. After several failed colonial attempts in Asia and Africa, he settled on the Congo. He “bought” it and enslaved its people, turning the entire country into his own personal slave plantation. He disguised his “business transactions” as philanthropic and scientific efforts under the banner of the “International African Society”. He used their enslaved labor to extract Congolese resources and services. His reign was enforced through work camps, body mutilations, executions, torture, and his private army.
Most of us are not taught about him in school. We don’t hear about him in the media. He’s not part of the widely repeated narrative of oppression. He’s part of a long history of colonialism, imperialism, slavery and genocide in Africa that would clash with the social construction of the European created narrative in our schools. It doesn’t fit neatly into a capitalist curriculum to talk about genocides in Africa perpetrated by European capitalist monarchs.
Mark Twain wrote a satire about Leopold called “King Leopold’s soliloquy. We can read about Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer, but King Leopold’s Soliloquy isn’t on the reading list. This isn’t by accident. Reading lists are created by boards of education. From the point of view of the Education Department, Africans have no history.
When we learn about Africa, we learn about a decolorized Egypt, about the HIV epidemic but never its causes. We learn about the surface level effects of the slave trade, and maybe about South African Apartheid which of course now is over. We also see a constant stream of pictures showing starving children on Christian Ministry commercials, we see safaris on animal shows, and we see pictures of deserts in films and movies. But we don’t learn about Leopold’s reign of terror during the Congolese Genocide.
The following is so horrific however it needs to be explored to further look at the atrocities we have suffered as a people. This is not to say others have not suffered but like the Hebrews and later Jews who examine their holocaust, we also need to have the courage to face our past. I drew heavily from Adam Hochschild’s work, King Leopold’s Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror, and Heroism in Colonial Africa.
He writes that he knew almost nothing about the history of the Congo. He found a footnote in a book that sparked his interest. It was a footnote that was a quotation by Mark Twain in which he said that he was part of the worldwide movement against slave labor in the Congo. This slavery and brutality resulted in the loss of eight to ten million lives. Hochschild was shocked beyond belief.
The men who seized the Congo often trumpeted their killings, bragging about them in books and newspaper articles. Some kept surprisingly frank diaries that show far more than the writers intended, as does a voluminous and explicit instruction book for colonial officials. Some officers of the private army that occupied the Congo came to feel guilty about the blood on their hands.
Mark Twain called King Léopold the slayer of 15 million Congolese and a “greedy, grasping, avaricious, cynical, bloodthirsty old goat.” His dark and graphic satire, ‘King Leopold’s Soliloquy: A Defense of His Congo Rule’, is published in pamphlet form by the American Congo Reform Association in September 1905.
In trying to agree on the worse human rights violator over the past 500 years, two candidates far and away go beyond all others. Adolph Hitler was not even close because he is only attributed with killing six million people and by comparison, his reign of terror only lasted about six years. However it was over a period of 25 years, Belgium’s King Leopold II was able to diminish the population of the Congo from 20 million to 10 million. Can you imagine that! Twenty five years after Christopher Columbus entered Haiti, the Arawak population was reduced to zero, that is, total annihilation and genocide of a whole class of humanity.
The Kingdom of the Congo was a strong united state known for its highly developed working of copper and iron. The Congo king welcomed Portuguese traders, artisans, and missionaries. It was some ten years before Columbus arrived in the Americas; the Portuguese came to Africa’s Congo. At first, good relationships developed between the Portuguese and the several million residents of the Kingdom of the Congo just like the Natives in the Americas. The Portuguese didn’t want to conquer or colonize the Congo. They only hoped to trade and to establish Christianity.
Slavery was and had been a part of the Congo culture. But, most slaves were war captives, criminals, or debtors who could in time earn back their freedom quite unlike the methods of slavery introduced later by Europeans. Congo clan chiefs and African Muslim slave traders from upriver were happy to sell their slaves to the Portuguese and other Europeans who transported them to America. I do not believe those traders knew what horrors awaited those they sold based on their personal experience with African slavery. However, I also see that we are willing to sell out our own for trinkets and crumbs. This slave trading continued and slowly but surely depopulated and damaged the once-powerful Kingdom of the Congo.
In 1871, journalist Henry M. Stanley electrified Europe when he found adventurer David Livingstone who had disappeared years earlier on an African expedition. Stanley then became resolute to fully explore the interior of Africa. Financed by New York and London newspapers, Stanley left the east coast of Africa in 1874 to lead a considerable mission. He navigated down the Congo for a thousand miles before encountering a 200-mile stretch of rapids. He finally arrived at the Atlantic Ocean in 1877, having traveled 7,000 miles across Africa. He announced that the Congo “is and will be the grand highway of commerce to west central Africa. He understood that this remained one of the few areas of the immeasurable continent not occupied by a European imperial power.
Leopold II, the king of the Belgians, devotedly followed press accounts of Stanley’s travels. Leopold was disturbed that tiny Belgium possessed no colonies. He yearned to rule a rich colonial empire.
Leopold invited Stanley to Belgium and convinced the now famous explorer to return to the Congo performing as the king’s personal representative. Leopold instructed Stanley, under the appearance of doing scientific explorations and combating slavery. His real intention was to secretly establish domination and control over the rich Congo ivory trade. Stanley had to get local clan chiefs to sign so-called “treaties,” turning over their lands and the labor of their people to Leopold without their knowledge.
It took Stanley five years but he signed more than 450 treaties with Congo chiefs. They had no idea what they were signing in trade for the cloth, trinkets, alcohol, and other shamefully cheap goods Stanley gave them. Many chiefs had no idea what they were signing. Few had seen the written word before, and they were being asked to mark their X’s to documents in a foreign language and in legalese. The idea of a treaty of friendship between two clans or villages was familiar. The idea of signing over one’s land to someone on the other side of the ocean was inconceivable. In return for “one piece of cloth per month to each of the undersigned chiefs, besides present of cloth in hand,” they promised to “freely of their own accord, for themselves and their heirs and successors for ever… give up to the said Association the sovereignty and all sovereign and governing rights to all their territories… and to assist by labor or otherwise, any works, improvements or expeditions which the Association shall cause at any time to be carried out in any part of these territories… . All roads and waterways running through this country, the right of collecting tolls on the same, and all game, fishing, mining and forest rights, are to be the absolute property of the said Association. Leopold sent agents to lobby Congress; the United States became the first nation to recognize his claim to the Congo. The conquerors of Africa, like those of the American West, were finding alcohol as effective as the machine gun.
In 1884-85, a conference held in Berlin, Germany, decided the colonial status of central Africa. Suspicious of each other’s ambitions in the region, the European powers and the United States agreed to grant Leopold possession of the Congo River basin. This encompassed nearly a million square miles, an area 80 times larger than Belgium. Of course, the people of the Congo took no part in the Berlin Conference and were unaware that their lives were about to tragically change.
The following material is from the book Geography: Realms, Regions and Concepts, by H. J. de Blij, Peter O. Muller, pp. 304-305 (2003)
In November 1884, the imperial chancellor and architect of the German Empire, Otto von Bismarck, convened a conference of 14 states (including the United States) to settle the political partitioning of Africa. Bismarck wanted not only to expand German spheres of influence in Africa but also to play off Germany’s colonial rivals against one another to the Germans’ advantage. Of these fourteen nations, France, Germany, Great Britain, and Portugal were the major players in the conference, controlling most of colonial Africa at the time.
In the second half of the nineteenth century, after more than four centuries of making contact with, the European powers in conclusion, laid claim to practically all of Africa. Representatives of European governments and rulers arrived to produce or increase African spheres of influence for their own purposes. Competition was intense. Spheres of authority began to crowd each other. It was time for finding the middle ground, and in late 1884 a conference was convened in Berlin to sort things out. This conference laid the groundwork for the now familiar politico-geographical map of Africa.
The Berlin West African Conference carves Africa into spheres of control. So, the lines you see across Africa were drawn by European Nations as they decided among themselves which areas they would exploit.
The colonial powers superimposed their domains on the African Continent. By the time Africa regained its independence after the late 1950s, the realm had acquired a legacy of political fragmentation that could neither be eliminated nor made to operate satisfactorily. The African politico-geographical map is thus a permanent liability that resulted from the years of ignorant, insatiable greed during a period when Europe’s search for minerals and markets had become unquenchable.
The Belgians acquired the vast territory that became The Congo. The Germans held four colonies, one in each of the realm’s regions. The Portuguese held a small colony in West Africa and two large ones in Southern Africa. The French dominated most of West Africa, and the British East and Southern Africa.
After colonial rule was firmly established in Africa, the only change in possessions came after World War I. Germany’s four colonies were placed under the League of Nations, which established a directive structure for other colonizers to oversee the territories.
Underlying much of Europe’s anticipation was the hope that Africa would be a source of raw materials to feed the Industrial Revolution, just as the search for raw materials and slaves for the colonial plantation economy had determined most of Europe’s earlier dealings with Africa. Expectations quickened considerably after prospectors discovered diamonds in South Africa in 1867 and gold some two decades later. But Europeans liked to think of themselves as having higher motives. The British, in particular, passionately believed in bringing “civilization” and Christianity to the natives. They were curious about what lay in the continent’s unknown interior. They were filled with self-righteousness about fighting slavery. Britain, of course, had only a doubtful right to the high moral view of slavery. In fact it was the British ships that had long dominated the slave trade, and only in 1838 had slavery formally been abolished in the British Empire.
The European colonization of Africa was one of the most distant and swiftest conquests in human history. In 1870 roughly 80 percent of Africa south of the Sahara Desert was governed by indigenous kings, chiefs, families with Fathers, Mothers and children along with other rulers. By 1910 nearly this entire huge expanse of humanity along with the land had become European colonies or land, like South Africa, controlled by White settlers. The bloodiest single incident in Africa’s colonization took place in the center of the continent in the large territory, identified as the Congo.
Equipped with repeating rifles, cannons, and machine guns and fighting against Africans with only spears or out of date muskets, King Leopold’s 19,000-man army filled with Black paid soldiers under White officers gradually took control of the vast territory. From the start the regime was founded on mandatory, forced labor. Unknown hundreds of thousands of Africans were put to work as porters to carry the White men’s goods. They were worked like animals as cutters of the wood needed to fire steamboat boilers, and as laborers of all kinds. In the early years the main article of trade Leopold sought was ivory.
The price of rubber begins to increase following the invention of the inflatable rubber tire. The agents and concession holders exploiting the Congo’s wild rubber vines now stand to make enormous profits, with returns of up to 700% per year being reported in 1891.
By means of bribes and lobbying, Leopold gained recognition for the Congo in 1884 by the United States, followed by a similar deal with France. By making a web of bilateral agreements at the Berlin conference in February 1885, he carved out the boundaries for this huge state. Once his possession of the Congo was secure, the rubber boom exploded. Rubber sap was in immense demand for tires and other products, and the Congo was covered with such vines. Joint ventures ensued between Belgian, British and Dutch firms. The enormous profits saved Leopold’s colonial empire.
To cash in on the opportunity, the Congolese laborers were squeezed further still. Local chiefs were required to supply men to collect the so-called ‘rubber tax’, with wives and children being held hostage and chiefs imprisoned until the men return with their quotas. The amount of rubber needed to meet the tax requires the men to work for up 25 days each month harvesting the wild rubber vines in the Congo forests, very similar to what we saw in the Americas under Christopher Columbus. Failure to supply the quotas results in floggings, torture, and death. Companies operating in the Congo used prison stockades to keep hostages. If the men of the village resisted the demands for rubber it meant the death of their wife, child or chief.
As the resistance increases so does the cost of subjugation, causing Léopold to declare a state monopoly on rubber and ivory in a bid to recover the increasing costs of maintaining control over the now rebellious populous. The Force Publique, (the occupying force) alone soaks up half the Congo’s restricted budget.
At its peak, the Force Publique numbers about 19,000 African paid soldiers, led by about 420 European officers. This is a disgrace and a shame but it is true that we Black Africans brutalized our own people for money and position. The force commits many atrocities to terrorize the Congolese into complying with Leopold’s ever-increasing demands. Villages are burned, and men, women and children are indiscriminately slaughtered or forced into slavery.
To prove the accomplishments of their patrols, Force Publique soldiers are ordered to cut off and bring back a dead victim’s right hand for every bullet fired. The soldiers resort to cutting off the hands of the living to ensure that the number of spent cartridges tallies with the number of preserved hands.
The headquarters of Force Publique leader Leon Rom exemplifies the gruesome nature of the regime. The fence surrounding Rom’s office bears a severed native head on each slat, and the garden contains a rockery full of rotting heads.
Listen to these eye witness reports: Even children were put to work: one observer noted seven—to nine-year-old children each carrying a load of twenty-two pounds. A file of poor devils, chained by the neck, carried my trunks and boxes toward the dock,” a Congo state official notes matter-of-factly in his memoirs. At the next stop on his journey more porters were needed for an overland trip: “There were about a hundred of them, trembling and fearful before the overseer, who strolled by whirling a whip. For each stocky and broad-backed fellow, how many were skeletons dried up like mummies, their skin worn out… seamed with deep scars, covered with suppurating (infected puss running) wounds… . No matter, they were all up to the job.
Unceasingly we meet these porters… Black, miserable, with only a horribly filthy loin-cloth for clothing, frizzy and bare head supporting the load—box, bale, ivory tusk… barrel; most of them sickly, drooping under a burden increased by tiredness and insufficient food—a handful of rice and some stinking dried fish; pitiful walking caryatids, beasts of burden with thin monkey legs, with drawn features, eyes fixed and round from preoccupation with keeping their balance and from the daze of exhaustion. They come and go like this by the thousands… requisitioned by the State armed with its powerful militia, handed over by chiefs whose slaves they are and who make off with their salaries, trotting with bent knees, belly forward, an arm raised to steady the load, the other leaning on a long walking-stick, dusty and sweaty, insects spreading out across the mountains and valleys their many files and their task of Sisyphus, dying along the road or, the journey over, heading off to die from overwork in their villages. The death toll was particularly high among porters forced to carry loads long distances. Of the three hundred porters conscripted in 1891 by District Commissioner Paul Lemarinel for a forced march of more than six hundred miles to set up a new post, not one returned.
On tracing the howls to their source, Lefranc found “some thirty urchins, of whom several were seven or eight years old, lined up and waiting their turn, watching, terrified, their companions being flogged. Most of the urchins, in a paroxysm of grief… kicked so frightfully that the soldiers ordered to hold them by the hands and feet had to lift them off the ground… . 25 times the whip slashed down on each of the children.” The evening before, Lefranc learned, several children had laughed in the presence of a White man, who then ordered that all the servant boys in town be given fifty lashes. The second installment of twenty-five lashes was due at six o’clock the next morning. Lefranc managed to get these stopped, but was told not to make any more protests that interfered with discipline.
The chicotte is a whip of raw, sun-dried hippopotamus hide, cut into a long sharp-edged corkscrew strip. Usually the chicotte was applied to the victim’s bare buttocks. Its blows would leave permanent scars; more than twenty-five strokes could mean unconsciousness; and a hundred or more—not an uncommon punishment—were often fatal. Lefranc was to see many more chicotte beatings, although his descriptions of them, in pamphlets and newspaper articles he published in Belgium, provoked little reaction. The station chief selects the victims… . Trembling, haggard, they lie face down on the ground… two of their companions; sometimes four, seize them by the feet and hands, and remove their cotton drawers… . Each time that the torturer lifts up the chicotte, a reddish stripe appears on the skin of the pitiful victims, who, however firmly held, gasp in frightful contortions… . At the first blows the unhappy victims let out horrible cries which soon become faint groans… . In a refinement of evil, some officers, and I’ve witnessed this, demand that when the sufferer gets up, panting, he must graciously give the military salute.
What made it possible for the functionaries in the Congo to so blithely watch the chicotte in action and, as we shall see, to deal out pain and death in other ways as well? To begin with, of course, was race. To Europeans, Africans were inferior beings: lazy, uncivilized, and little better than animals. In fact, the most common way they were put to work was, like animals, as beasts of burden. In any system of terror, the functionaries must first of all see the victims as less than human, and Victorian ideas about race provided such a foundation. Then, of course, the terror in the Congo was sanctioned by the authorities. For a White man to rebel meant challenging the system that provided your livelihood. Everyone around you was participating. By going along with the system, you were paid, promoted, awarded medals.
The terror campaign succeeds and Leopold’s profits soar. In 1904, Roger Casement’s 62-page report on the CFS is published. The reports of images of hostage taking, floggings, mutilation, forced labor and murder causes a public outrage. In Britain the CRA receives the support of many leading figures, including Arthur Conan Doyle, the writer and creator of the Sherlock Holmes mystery series. The spreading news of the misery of Africans in the Congo gains the support of the African-American educator Booker T. Washington and the writer Mark Twain.
In an article titled ‘Cruelty in the Congo Country’, Washington writes, “There was never anything in American slavery that could be compared to the barbarous conditions existing today in the Congo Free State.”
Over the time of Leopold’s rule the population of the Congo has declined from an estimated 20-30 million to less than nine million.
The Belgium Parliament will hold no formal commission of inquiry into the human rights abuses that occurred in the CFS (Congo Free State) and no officials will be held to account.
Meanwhile, Arthur Conan Doyle publishes ‘The Crime of the Congo’, his account of how under Leopold’s rule the Congolese have been “robbed of all they possessed, debauched, degraded, mutilated, tortured, murdered, all on such a scale as has never, to my knowledge, occurred before in the whole course of history.”
Both Columbus and Leopold were great salesmen and great liars. To help finance his second voyage, Columbus told the Spanish Monarch that “there are many wide rivers of which the majority contain gold… there are many spices, and great mines of gold and other metals.” Columbus was so convincing the Queen Isabella provided him with 17 ships and 1,200 men for his second voyage and promised him 10% of all the gold and precious metals he brought back.
Leopold’s chance for salesmanship and lying came at the Berlin Conference (November 1884-February 1885) where European countries met to decide how they would divide up Africa. Leopold begged for the Congo Basin and guaranteed the well being of the Congo’s native population. Leopold told the American delegation that “Belgium deserves the opportunity to prove to the world that it also was an imperial people, capable of dominating and enlightening others.” Since Leopold knew that the Belgium parliament and Belgium people had no interest in Africa, he essentially was arguing for a land mass 80 times the size of Belgium, which he would own personally.
Columbus and Leopold saw the profits from their new lands as virtually limitless if enough free labor were available. Both men immediately proceeded to institute slavery among the native population and set quotas for individual production. The favorite method of punishment by Columbus and Leopold for not meeting quotas was to cut off the hands.
Columbus ordered all persons 14 years old and older to collect a certain quantity of gold every three months. When they brought it, they were given copper tokens to hang around their necks. Arawaks found without copper tokens to hang around their necks had their hands cut off and bled to death. Leopold chose to set quotas for ivory and rubber for each village. When a village fell short of its quota, his soldiers brutally raided the village and cut off the victims’ right hands. Sean Kelly wrote: “Hands became a sort of currency in that soldiers were paid their bonuses on the basis of how many right hands they collected.”
Columbus and Leopold were exceptionally cruel to women and children. Both men allowed their soldiers to kidnap women as sex slaves, and they also held women and children as hostages to insure that the native men would not run away. Female hostages were usually poorly fed and large numbers died of starvation. Newborns also had a very high mortality rate because the mothers were too famished to provide nursing milk.
The Arawaks and Africans both fought back but were no match for the armor and swords of Columbus nor the guns and artillery of Leopold’s soldiers. Rebelling natives were treated exceedingly cruel by both oppressors. Although both men used hanging, Columbus preferred burning victims alive if possible or feeding them to the attack dogs. Leopold’s soldiers enjoyed summary executions followed by chopping off the victims’ heads and placing the heads on poles around their gardens. Guillaume Van Kerckhoven, a Leopold officer, cheerfully bragged to a missionary that he paid his Black soldiers five brass rods per human head they brought him during the course of any military operation he conducted. He said it was to stimulate their prowess in the face of the enemy.
A single man in both cases dedicated his life to exposing the atrocities of Columbus and Leopold to the world. Bartolome de Las Casas, a Dominican priest, was initially a friend of Columbus and helped transcribe his journals. However, he soon became a vehement critic of Spanish cruelty and published a two-volume book detailing Spanish torture. He estimates that three million Arawaks died between 1495 and 1508. Edmund Dene Morel, a trusted employee of the Liverpool shipping line, dedicated his life to exposing the atrocities of King Leopold. He single-handedly put this subject on the world’s front pages for more than a decade, which resulted in worldwide protest rallies. Morel mobilized everyone from Booker T. Washington to the Archbishop of Canterbury to join his cause. He even went to the White House insisting to President Theodore Roosevelt that the United States had a special responsibility to do something about the Congo since the U.S. helped Leopold at the Berlin Conference. Morel’s unrelenting efforts resulted in Western powers forcing King Leopold to sell the Congo to Belgium in 1908.
Despite responsibility for death tolls of holocaust dimensions, neither Christopher Columbus nor King Leopold II was convicted or imprisoned for any crimes. Both men lived a full life and died exceptionally rich. Columbus spent his last years living in a mansion in Valladolid with an annual income of $60,000 from his Hispaniola sugar plantations (a fortune in the 1500s). Leopold died in 1909 with a personal fortune (produced by the Congo’s ivory and rubber) of well over a billion dollars in today’s currency. And, of course these monies stayed in European families and businesses, advancing the gap of haves and have not’s.
When these historical facts are taken into account, I am sure there are a number of emotional responses. They will range according to who is reading this. However, if you are experiencing tremendous internal pain, anger, disgust along with other emotions, that can be used to your advantage. In my two books The Power to Change and The Revelation of Power, there is powerful information contained in both regarding using your controlling of emotions, even negative ones, to motivate you to do right actions in the present to affect your own future and the future of other people. There were many of all races who came together to stop this tragic series of events in the Congo. And so it is today. We as human beings can take all these negative events and use the suffering of ourselves and others to build better relationships, communities and a better nation. Those of us who are Africans no matter where we are we can use the energy of our emotions and build a new direction based on common interests not against anyone else but for ourselves so others may benefit from our awakening to new possibilities. It is not so much what has happened to us in the past, but what are we going to do with what happened to us? Massive success is the greatest revenge!
A Colonial or European Education
A colonial or European education very carefully annihilates a peoples belief in their names, in their languages, in their surroundings, in their inheritance of a struggle, in their unity, in their capacity and ultimately in themselves. It makes them see their past as one wilderness of non-achievement and it makes them want to detach themselves from that harsh environment. It makes them want to identify with that which is furthest removed from their true selves and in the case of Black and White, the downtrodden and conquered, well they want to identify with Europeans. And frankly, not to know the true African self because it has been so distorted, painful and rejected through mental manipulation.
One of the reasons that true history is presented in this book is because as Black people must see outside of the books and miss-education designed to keep us oppressed. We need to logically understand our situation and begin to think about our community and our world to make the changes necessary to give us life. This happens through dialogue in education that relates to the reality we live in now not a devotion to someone else’s history even if it’s in the Bible. Remember Hebrew stories are their stories and views. Many times it is their view and yet we believe it’s God’s view.
Only Black people as the oppressed can save us and the oppressors from oppression. And, liberation must come from within the oppressed community, who must work their way through thought analysis of our problems to a critical understanding of reality, which leads to action. Truth will set all of us free to love and respect each other as human beings. The problem is universal, for Africans, rooted in the struggle between an oppressive upper class. Generally Europeans who are bent on maintaining power and an oppressed lower class of mainly Black and Brown people who are rendered impotent by oppression.
Every time the European invaded a new land the indigenous inhabitants were made into or described as devils demons and witches. This made it much easier for their barbaric, illiterate troops to murder, rape and plunder the innocents they found already in the land. The Indians became the “red” man so the color of the devil was changed to red. This kind of psychological programming made it easier to kill in mass. Because, after all you were not killing humans but rather you were killing devils and demons. Those who refused to surrender were murdered or enslaved. There were others who agreed to submit and join forces as subjects of European masters. That is how we as Blacks became Buffalo Soldiers, slave sellers and participated in the genocide in the Belgian Congo. For a few trinkets or promises of power we submitted and participated in our own destruction. Even some Indians became scouts for the European armies that marched across the “New World.” Remember we must know the truth so that we can break the psychological mind tricks that have been used against us and come to know the greatness of your own properly, historically, oriented self.
We, the oppressed are held back by an external situation of oppression that is self-sustaining because the oppressive situation surrounds the oppressed masses completely through all forms of media. We are submerged in a culture of oppression, and it is sometimes, especially in depressed inner cities, is the only world that we the oppressed know. The culture of oppression becomes internalized and seems so all-encompassing that it cannot be overcome or broken out of. We, the oppressed become fatalistic, blaming our situation on fate or our own incompetence, or God.
The European oppressors systematically oppress, characterizing the lower Black and Brown classes as stupid and lazy, dividing them among themselves, and implementing programs that single out potential leaders to separate them from their Black and brown brothers and sisters. The oppressors implement education that reinforces class and race divisions, (Willie Lynch) and discourages the oppressed from learning to think independently and therefore becoming empowered. The oppressors are selfish and self-centered, only desiring wealth for themselves. That fact is clearly born out through looking at history. The oppressors are also materialistic, confusing the accumulation of things with freedom, power and a sense that we are better. Now, of course what I just wrote does not apply to all Europeans, and things are changing however, we as African Americans need to understand what we are facing, especially what our children are facing.
The state of society that causes one class of people to remain entrenched in poverty while another class of people enjoys the benefits of the lower class’s labor in America is because that was the idea that brought us here and many still subscribe to that kind of thinking and action. Oppression is an act of violence by the oppressors, who violate the oppressed by suppressing their humanity and making them impotent and incapable of thinking and acting in their own best interest. The oppressed in general, become part of a system that keeps them from advancing as human beings. Of course there are many who escape this oppression by study or role models that give them a spirit to overcome these disadvantages.
Oppression runs contrary to the natural essence of humanity, and so it dehumanizes both the oppressor and the oppressed. The continued oppression and direct efforts to keep Black and Brown people down takes away from the greatness that could be achieved in America. The opposite of oppression is freedom, which is a humanizing experience involving learning to think critically for yourself and your community including acting on one’s thoughts and beliefs. Part of gaining freedom is recognizing the causes of oppression and understanding objectively the forces that maintain oppression. When America truly accepts that and begins to live out that reality we will become that bright, shinning light and the fame of nations.
We Blacks as the oppressed have internalized the oppressor’s views and the oppressiveness of their culture, and therefore we many times may enforce our own oppression on each other. Some of us as oppressed people may believe that fate or God’s will or our own stupidity and laziness is responsible for our oppressive situation. Some are convinced that where we are in life is God’s will, since we are taught He controls all and directs the rise and fall of nations.
There can be no liberation without education because we as Black people must be able to think critically in order to take meaningful action, which is in itself an act of freedom. Black people must learn to make choices about their lives that affect our community and the world, and this is essentially the same concept as free will: the ability to make and act in a conscious thought process of positive choice, knowing and understanding that we must begin to help ourselves.
Myths
Europeans had to create a rationale in a series of myths to justify their new position and what they intended to extract from non European people. Some of the myths set in motion by what I have referred to as the Columbus era still plague the world today. With the Atlantic slave trade the Europeans set in motion a Holocaust for African people that is still active in some form on the 500 year anniversary of Christopher Columbus alleged discovery day. It also set in motion an air of protracted genocide against non European people that continues, with its many dimensions, in every place in the world where there is European influence over non European people. There weren’t enough soldiers in Europe to take over the continent of Africa, the Caribbean islands and both south and North America. The greatest achievement of the Europeans was the conquest of the mind of their victims through a series of myths that could bear re-examining in order to understand the deeper meanings of Christopher Columbus era and the reverberations for today.
There are several myths that have been used against us and forms our negative mind set, for example here are four: Number one, the myth of people waiting in obscurity for another people to bring them the light, mainly Europeans. In most countries where Europeans invaded or influenced they put out the light of local civilizations and customs and shattered civilizations, civilizations that were old before the European nations were born.
Number two the myth of a people without a true God of their own. Europeans made no serious attempt to understand the religious cultures of non-European people wherever they went in the world. If their God concept was not in agreement with the Europeans, then the Europeans assured them that they had no God worthy of worship.
Number three, the myth of the primitive, the backward and the aborigine. Here we have a misinterpretation of two words that originally meant first or the original. European interpretation was to use downgrading language and that kind of language is still used today. In many ways the Europeans were sent to non European people and determined that they, the indigenous people did not have the right to choose a God or a culture different from that of Europeans.
Number four the myth of the invader and the conqueror as a civilizer. Generally speaking no people ever spread a civilization anywhere or at any time in human history through invasion and conquest. The invader and the conqueror spread their way of life at the expense of his victims. They generally destroy civilization in the name of civilization. The Europeans not only colonize history they colonized information about history. The most disastrous of all their colonization’s was the colonization of the image of God. They denied the conquered people the right to see God through their own imagination or to address God in a word that came from their own language. Every effort was made to write from their memory how they ruled a state and how they related to their spirituality before the coming of Europeans.
Most of the people in the world were forced to forget by way of historical exclusion, that over half of human history was over before anyone knew that a Europe existed. Nile Valley civilizations, Ethiopia and Kemet, had laid the basis for the spirituality that was later converted into the three major religions of the world that we see now. Africans also developed the pattern of philosophical thought adopted in most of the world’s holy books. All of this happened outside of Europe before Europeans had names or houses with windows. It is necessary that we look back in order to look forward with more understanding.
Many times it is assumed in America that African history began with the slave trade. Important note: There were over 1000 years of independent state formation and state management of inner West Africa called the Western Sudan before the slave trade. This period of independent African political and cultural activity needs to be reviewed for your enlightenment and in order to understand at least in part what West Africa lost in the slave trade. African history has been locked behind a slavery curtain and purposeful misinformation. It is indispensable for our understanding today to look at West African history before and after the slave trade in order to understand how and why the slave trade occurred. Also, why were African people, more than any other people in the world, its main victims? The Africans were open-minded and politically naïve and their relationship with non-African people, especially the European. In fact, just like the Indians we were a trusting people and there were those who were willing to be a sell out for a few trinkets.
Again I say, that if the Catholic Church as the most powerful political, social, economic and so-called spiritual institution of Europe did not legitimize the slave trade, this unconscionable trade in humans could not have gone on for centuries. Can you imagine that? Humans who called themselves agents of God’s will were no more than greedy, inhumane savages. Well, how would you describe them? How do you describe Hitler and his actions? What is the difference?
The Pilgrims
The Pilgrims later came to America to escape religious persecution from the British, and yet they turned right around with no empathy and understanding for fellow members of the human race and committed ethnic and religious persecution against the Native Americans and, later on, others. This they did in reality while attending Churches and believing that this is God’s will.
Many European historians try to focus on the disease factor to explain the genocide however, by focusing almost entirely on disease, by displacing responsibility for the mass killing onto an army of invading microbes, present-day authors more and more have fashioned the idea that the annihilation of those tens of millions of people was unintentional calling it a sad, but both inevitable and inadvertent end result of human migration and progress.
The Eurocentric racial disrespect for the indigenous peoples of North and South America, as well as Africa, is reflected in the academic writings is now so complete and watered down that it has become second nature to most Americans that it has passed into popular lore and common knowledge of the every schoolboy knows variety. No intent to distort the truth is any longer necessary. Most people still believe that Columbus discovered America and yet he never set foot in America. All that is required, once the model is established, is the recitation of rote learning as it passes from one uncritical generation to the next. If you tell a lie long enough without any contrary information, it becomes an established “truth”
American Indians
The real story of the Indians has been hidden by a blanket of purposeful historical miss education and misunderstanding. By the 1830’s the United States had forced Indians to move to lands west of the Mississippi. Indians have been cheated, robbed and murdered for their lands. By 1890 most Indians had been killed and most were forced to leave their land even on the reservations as more and more settlers desired their lands. They have become the poorest minority in America. The land was stolen from the Indians by men who called themselves good Christians. They claimed that Indians were savages and deserved what happened to them. At one time more than one million Indians lived in what later became the United States.
At the time of the first Thanksgiving in 1621, human beings were brutally stolen from Africa and brutally subdued, raped, lynched, castrated and made into slaves that is, if they happened to survive the cruel capture and horrific Atlantic crossing they began to be introduced to North America. It is estimated that anywhere from 50 to 100 million Africans lost their lives in the capture and transportation to the New World. So while Africans were being heartlessly torn away from their homes and families, viciously enslaved and dehumanized, tortured and killed, Native Americans were being attacked and annihilated.
When the Pilgrims came to New England they too were coming not to a vacant land but to territory inhabited by tribes of Indians. The governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, John Winthrop, created the excuse to take Indian land by declaring the area legally a vacuum. The Indians, he said, had not subdued the land, and therefore had only a natural right to it, but not a civil right. A natural right did not have legal standing. The tactic is the same today. Understand what is wanted, then make the laws and use contrived language to help achieve your goals.
This particular information comes from the hidden history of Massachusetts which says that much of America’s understanding of the early relationship between the Indians and the Europeans is relayed through the created story of Thanksgiving. This proclaimed holiday was brought to us in 1863 by Abraham Lincoln. This is literally a fairy tale of a feast and has been allowed to exist in the American imagination pretty much untouched until 1970, the 350th anniversary of the landing of the Pilgrims. That is when Frank B. James, president of the Federated Eastern Indian League, prepared a speech for a Plymouth banquet that exposed the Pilgrims for having committed, among other crimes, the robbery of the graves of the Wampanoag Indians. He wrote: “We welcomed you, the White man, with open arms, little knowing that it was the beginning of the end; that before 50 years were to pass, the Wampanoag would no longer be a free people.” White Massachusetts officials told him he could not deliver such a speech and offered to write him another. Instead, James declined to speak, and on Thanksgiving Day hundreds of Indians from around the country came to protest. It was the first National Day of Mourning, a day to mark the losses Native Americans suffered as the early settlers prospered. This true story of “Thanksgiving” is what Whites did not want Frank B. James, president of the Federated Eastern Indian League to tell.
So, what really happened in Plymouth in 1621? Well, according to a single-paragraph account in the writings of one Pilgrim, a harvest feast did take place in Plymouth in 1621, probably in mid-October, but the Indians who attended were not even invited. Though it later became known as “Thanksgiving,” the Pilgrims never called it that. And amidst the imagery of a picnic of interracial harmony is some of the most terrifying bloodshed in New World history.
Listen to the real story: The Pilgrim crop had failed miserably that year, but the agricultural know-how of the Indians had produced twenty acres of corn, without which the Pilgrims would have surely perished. The Indians, out of their kindness, often brought food to the Pilgrims, who came from England. They were ridiculously unprepared to survive and hence relied almost completely on handouts from the overly generous Indians. The Pilgrims invited the Indian sachem Massasoit to their feast, and it was Massasoit Indians, engaging in the tribal tradition of equal sharing, who then invited ninety or more of his Indian brothers and sisters, much to the annoyance of the 50 or so ungrateful Europeans. Does this sound like a people who needed the Bible? There was no turkey, cranberry sauce or pumpkin pie served; they likely ate duck or geese and the venison from the 5 deer brought by Massasoit Indians. In fact, most, if not all, of the food was most likely brought and prepared by the Indians. Their familiarity with the food of the region had kept the Whites alive up to that point.
This event marked the first actual Thanksgiving. In just 10 years 12,000 Whites had invaded New England, and as their numbers grew they pressed for excessive annihilation of the Indian. The Pilgrims did not wear Black hats or buckled shoes; these were the ridiculous inventions of artists hundreds of years since that time.
Contrary to popular myths, the Pilgrims were no friends to the local Indians. They were engaged in a ruthless war of extermination against their hosts, even as they falsely posed as friends. Just days before the alleged Thanksgiving love-fest, a company of Pilgrims led by Myles Standish actively sought to chop off the head of a local chief. They deliberately caused a rivalry between two friendly Indians, pitting one against the other in an attempt to obtain “better intelligence and make them both more diligent.” An 11-foot-high wall was erected around the entire settlement for the purpose of keeping the Indians out.
Any Indian who came within the surrounding area of the Pilgrim settlement was subject to robbery, enslavement, or even murder. The Pilgrims further advertised their evil intentions and White racial hostility, when they mounted five cannons on a hill around their settlement, constructed a platform for artillery, and then organized their soldiers into four companies. All this was done in preparation for the military destruction of their “friends” the Indians. I remember having a debate with a European in Connecticut where he said, and I will never forget it, and maybe you should remember this also. “We got rid of the Indians; we can get rid of you,” meaning you Black people! And I know there are many who think this way today. However we should no longer participate in our own destruction. Part of reversing our negative actions is to have a better self image through a proper view of our history and contribution to the world.
Pilgrim Myles Standish eventually got his blood-spattered prize. He went to the Indians, pretended to be a trader and then beheaded an Indian man named Wituwamat. He brought the head to Plymouth, where it was displayed on a wooden spike for many years, according to Gary B. Nash, “as a symbol of White power.” Standish had the Indian man’s young brother hanged from the rafters for good measure. From that time on, the Whites were known to the Indians of Massachusetts by the name “Wotowquenange,” which in their tongue meant cutthroats and stabbers.
The myth of the fierce, ruthless Indian savage lusting after the blood of innocent Europeans must be vigorously dispelled at this point. In actuality, the historical record shows that the very opposite was true. Because of the beautiful long hair Indians possessed, they were scalped. Anyone could reap a ££50 reward in Massachusetts for the scalp of an Indian thus demonstrating that the practice of scalping was a European tradition. According to one scholar, “Hunting redskins became… a popular sport in New England, especially since prisoners were worth good money…” So, who are the real savages?
Listen to the psychological approach to spreading miss information then and now. The Europeans spoke of peace and brought war. The destruction of Indian villages was called a punishment, Indian attacks on the settlements to protect themselves from the European invasion was and are still called massacres. Indians soon learned they had no choice. They had to give up their lands or die.
Genocide is not new! It has happened on every continent and in every century. This information regarding Europeans and the history of America is designed to put African Americans in the proper mind set to fight for self determination and self knowledge.
Once the European settlements stabilized, the Whites turned on their hosts in a brutal way. The once friendly relationship was breeched again and again by the Whites, who lusted over the riches of Indian land. A combination of the Pilgrims’ demonization of the Indians, the concocted mythology of Eurocentric historians, and standard Hollywood propaganda has served to paint the gentle Indian as a tomahawk swinging savage endlessly on the warpath, lusting for the blood of the God-fearing Whites. But the Pilgrims’ own historical testimony destroys that fallacy. The Indians engaged each other in military contests from time to time, but the causes of “war,” the methods, and the resulting damage differed profoundly from the European variety:
Indian “wars” were largely symbolic and were about honor, not about territory or extermination. “Wars” were fought as domestic correction for a specific act and were ended when correction was achieved. Such action might better be described as internal cleansing. The conquest or destruction of whole territories and genocidal treatment of others was a European concept. So, again who were the “Savages?”
Indian “wars” were often engaged in by family groups, not by whole tribal groups, and would involve only the family members. A lengthy compromise was engaged in between the wounded parties before rising to physical conflict would be approved. Surprise attacks were unheard of to the Indians. It was regarded as proof of bravery for a man to go into “battle” carrying no weapon that would do any harm at a distance, not even bows and arrows. The bravest act in war in some Indian cultures was to touch their challenger and escape before he could do physical harm. The targeting of non combatants like women, children, and the elderly was never even thought of or done. Indians uttered surprise and disgust when the Europeans told, and then showed, them that they considered women and children fair game in their style of warfare.
A major Indian “war” might end with less than a dozen casualties on both sides. And, very often, when the arrows had been expended the “war” would be halted. The European practice of wiping out whole nations in bloody massacres was incomprehensible to the Indian.
According to one scholar, “The most notable feature of Indian warfare was its relative inequity.” European observers of Indian wars often expressed surprise at how little harm they actually inflicted. “Their wars are far less bloody and devouring than the cruel wars of Europe,” commented settler Roger Williams in 1643. Even Puritan warmonger and professional soldier Capt. John Mason scoffed at Indian warfare: Their feeble manner… did hardly deserve the name of fighting. Fellow warmonger John Underhill spoke of the Narragansett’s, after having spent a day “burning and spoiling” their country: “no Indians would come near us, but run from us, as the deer from the dogs.” He concluded that the Indians might fight seven years and not kill seven men. Their fighting style, he wrote, “is more for pastime, than to conquer and subdue enemies.” And, for all their humanity, they were slaughtered wholesale.
In one incident around 1637, a force of Whites trapped some seven hundred Pequot Indians, mostly women, children, and the elderly, near the mouth of the Mystic River. Englishman John Mason attacked the Indian camp with “fire, sword, blunderbuss, and tomahawk.” Only a handful escaped and few prisoners were taken to the apparent delight of the Europeans: To see Indians frying in a fire, and the streams of their blood quenching the same, and the stench must have been horrible. The Europeans victory seemed a sweet sacrifice, and they gave praise therefore to God.
All this describes a people for whom war is a deeply regrettable last resort. An agrarian people, the American Indians had devised a civilization that provided dozens of options all designed to avoid conflict. They were the very opposite of Europeans, for whom all-out war, a ferocious bloodlust, and systematic genocide are their apparent life force.
Thomas Jefferson advocated the physical extermination of the American Indian and said of Europe, The Europeans are nations of eternal war. All their energies are exhausted in the destruction of labor, property and lives of their people. Does that sound familiar even today?
By 1675, the Massachusetts Englishmen were in a full-scale war with the great Indian chief of the Wampanoags, Metacomet. The Metacomet watched the steady wearing down of the lifestyle and culture of his people as European forced laws and values engulfed them. In 1671, the Europeans had ordered Metacomet to come to Plymouth to enforce upon him a new treaty, which included the humiliating rule that he could no longer sell his own land without prior approval from them. They also demanded that he turn in his community’s firearms. Marked for extermination by the merciless power of a distant king and his ruthless subjects, Metacomet retaliated in 1675 with raids on several isolated frontier towns. Eventually, and pushed to the limit of their endurance, the Indians attacked 52 of the 90 New England towns, destroying 13 of them. The Englishmen eventually regrouped, and after much bloodletting defeated the great Indian nation, just half a century after their arrival on Massachusetts soil. Historian Douglas Edward Leach describes the bitter end: The ruthless executions, the cruel sentences were all aimed at the same goal, European domination in southern New England. That the program succeeded is convincingly demonstrated by the almost complete submissiveness of the local native ever since.
When Captain Benjamin Church tracked down and murdered Metacomet in 1676, his body was quartered and parts were “left for the wolves.” Remember these were great Indian Chiefs with great pride in their people who were kind, compassionate and shared what they had. The great Indian chief’s hands were cut off and sent to Boston and his head went to Plymouth, where it was set upon a pole on the real first “day of public Thanksgiving for the beginning of revenge upon the enemy.” Metacomet’s nine year old son was destined for execution because, the Europeans reasoned, the offspring of the devil must pay for the sins of their father. The child was instead shipped to the Caribbean to spend his life in slavery.
As the Holocaust continued, several official Thanksgiving Days were proclaimed. Governor Joseph Dudley declared in 1704 a General Thanksgiving, not in celebration of the brotherhood of man but for God’s infinite Goodness to extend His favors of victory. They gave thanks for believing that God had delivered the Indians into their hands for defeat.
When Christopher Columbus first set foot on the White sands of Guanahani island, he performed a ceremony to “take possession” of the land for the king and queen of Spain, acting under the international laws of Western Christendom. Although the story of Columbus’ “discovery” has taken on mythological proportions in most of the Western world, few people are aware that his act of “possession” was based on a religious doctrine now known in history as the Doctrine of Discovery. Even fewer people realize that today five centuries later the United States government still uses this archaic Judeo-Christian doctrine to deny the rights of Native American Indians.
With Columbus’ journey to the Americas, it is important to recognize that the grim acts of genocide and conquest committed by Columbus and his men against the peaceful Native people of the Caribbean were sanctioned by the documents of the Catholic Church. Indeed, these papal documents were frequently used by Christian European conquerors in the Americas to justify an incredibly brutal system of colonization which dehumanized the indigenous people by regarding their territories as being “inhabited only by brute animals.
The Christian “Law of Nations”
The Christian “Law of Nations” asserted that Christian nations had a divine right, based on the Bible, to claim absolute title to and ultimate authority over any newly “discovered” Non-Christian inhabitants and their lands. Over the next several centuries, these beliefs gave rise to the Doctrine of Discovery used by Spain, Portugal, England, France, and Holland all Christian nations. Papal infallibility is a dogma of the Catholic Church which states that, by action of the Holy Spirit, the pope is preserved from even the possibility of error.
When you study Christian history in Seminary this view is not presented. To associate the lust for power and gold with the reformation sounds incredible, especially because it is presented as such a noble act by Martin Luther. This is one of the main reasons history is so important. When you stay in the “bubble” of the Bible and its “history” you cannot really see what has happened and how events shape actions.
After the Moors and under various theological and legal doctrines formulated during and after the Crusades, non-Christians were considered enemies of the Catholic faith and, as such, less than human. Accordingly, in the bull of 1452, Pope Nicholas directed King Alfonso to “capture, vanquish, and subdue the Saracens, a term for Muslims and pagans, and other enemies of Christ,” to “put them into perpetual slavery,” and “to take all their possessions and property.” Acting on this papal privilege, Portugal continued to traffic in African slaves, and expanded its royal dominions by making “discoveries” along the western coast of Africa, claiming those lands as Portuguese territory.
Thus, when Columbus sailed west across the Sea of Darkness in 1492—with the express understanding that he was authorized to “take possession” of any lands he “discovered” that were “not under the dominion of any Christian rulers,” he and the Spanish sovereigns of Aragon and Castile were following an already well-established tradition of “discovery” and conquest. Indeed, after Columbus returned to Europe, Pope Alexander VI issued a papal document, the bull Inter Cetera of May 3, 1493, “granting” to Spain at the request of Ferdinand and Isabella the right to conquer the lands which Columbus had already found, as well as any lands which Spain might “discover” in the future. So, you can see whenever Europeans or Whites decide in some back room or conclave of conspirators that they want something, morals and justice are not part of the decision making process. In their minds all is fair in love and war and they saw themselves as an instrument of war against all other people legitimized by their personal interpretation of the Bible.
In the Inter Cetera document, Pope Alexander stated his desire that the “discovered” people be “subjugated and brought to the faith itself.” By this means, said the pope, the “Christian Empire” would increase. When Portugal protested this concession to Spain, Pope Alexander stipulated in a subsequent bull issued May 4, 1493, that Spain must not attempt to establish its dominion over lands which had already “come into the possession of any Christian lords.” Then, to calm down the two rival monarchs, the pope drew a line of demarcation between the two poles, giving Spain rights of conquest and dominion over one side of the globe, and Portugal over the other.
With Columbus’ journey to the Americas, it is important to recognize that the grim acts of genocide and conquest committed by Columbus and his men against the peaceful Native people of the Caribbean were sanctioned by the aforementioned documents of the Catholic Church. Indeed, these papal documents were frequently used by Christian European conquerors in the Americas to justify an incredibly brutal system of colonization which dehumanized the indigenous people by regarding their territories as being “inhabited only by brute animals.” In the minds of Europeans and Whites their ends justify their means no matter who gets slaughtered or enslaved. Now, remember we are just looking at the facts of history and the investigation of how Europeans and Whites have treated people of color on this planet we all share.
The lesson to be learned is that the papal bulls of 1452 and 1493 are but two clear examples of how the “Christian Powers,” or “different States of Christendom,” viewed indigenous peoples as “the lawful spoil and prey of their civilized conquerors.” In fact, the Christian “Law of Nations” asserted that Christian nations had a divine right, based on the Bible, to claim absolute title to and ultimate authority over any newly “discovered” Non-Christian inhabitants and their lands. Over the next several centuries, these beliefs gave rise to the Doctrine of Discovery used by Spain, Portugal, England, France, and Holland actually all Christian nations.
The Papal bull Romanus Pontifex of 1455 has served as the basis of legal arguments for taking Native American lands by “discovery”, and continues to do so today. The logic of the rights of conquest and discovery were followed in all western nations including those that never recognized papal authority. This continued under the Americans after they established the United States. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in the 1823 case Johnson v. McIntosh that as a result of European discovery of lands not owned by Christians, the ownership and rights to the lands went from the original European conquerors to the Americans by treaties made with the European conquerors; the Native Americans had no say in these discoveries or treaties, nor any rights as non-Christians to the right of title to the land. They only had the right to occupancy in their native lands, as long as permitted by Europeans and their successors to remain there. Since “discovery gave an exclusive right to extinguish the Indian title of occupancy either by purchase or by conquest”, they could and would be kicked off the land at any time the Americans felt the need to do so. This is and has served as the basis for federal Indian law since 1823.
This decision was upheld in the 1831 case Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, giving Georgia authority to extend state laws over Cherokees within the state, and famously describing Native American tribes as “domestic dependent nations.” This decision was modified in Worcester v. Georgia, which stated that the U.S. federal government, and not individual states, had authority in Indian affairs, but it maintained the loss of right to title upon discovery by Europeans. Europeans have conquered, subdued, slaughtered and exploited whole civilizations. Then they set themselves up as the rule makers thus holding those conquered in a continual state of physical and mental slavery with or without the physical chains.
Using the principle of “discovery” as its foundational argument, the Supreme Court stated in 1831 that the Cherokee Nation (and, by implication, all Indian nations) was not fully sovereign, but “may, perhaps,” be deemed a “domestic dependent nation.” In the case: Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, The federal government took this to mean that treaties made with Indian nations did not recognize Indian nations as free of U.S. control. According to the U.S. government, Indian nations were “domestic dependent nations” subject to the federal government’s absolute legislative authority known in the law as “plenary power.” Thus, the ancient doctrine of Christian discovery and its subjugation of “heathen” Indians were extended by the federal government into a mythological, fairytale doctrine that the U.S. Constitution allows for governmental authority over Indian nations and their lands. In other words, they make up what they want and add self serving legal language to their purpose even if it is evil in its intent.
The myth of U.S. “plenary power” over Indians, a power, by the way, that was never intended by the authors of the Constitution has been used by the United States to:
One: Get around the terms of solemn treaties that the U.S. entered into with Indian nations, in spite of the fact that all such treaties are “supreme Law of the Land, anything in the Constitution notwithstanding.”
Two: Steal the homelands of Indian peoples living east of the Mississippi River, by removing them from their traditional ancestral homelands through the Indian Removal Act of 1835.
Three: Use a congressional statute, known as the General Allotment Act of 1887, to divest Indian people of some 90 million acres of their lands. This act, explained John Collier (Commissioner of Indian Affairs) was “an indirect method peacefully under the forms of law of taking away the land that we were determined to take away but did not want to take it openly by breaking the treaties.”
Four: Steal the sacred Black Hills from the Great Sioux nation in violation of the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie which recognized the Sioux Nation’s exclusive and absolute possession of their lands.
Five: Pay the Secretary of the Interior $26 million for 24 million acres of Western Shoshone lands, because the Western Shoshone people have steadfastly refused to sell the land and refused to accept the money. Although the Western Shoshone Nation’s sovereignty and territorial borders were clearly acknowledged by the federal government in the 1863 Ruby Valley Treaty, the government now claims that paying itself on behalf of the Western Shoshone has extinguished the Western Shoshone’s title to their lands. It does not matter that in the same collection of books called the Bible its states that you should not lie and cheat, in the minds of the European and White conquerors, it’s as right as rain.
Looking into the European psyche
The collective European psyche is rarely, if ever examined in particular on the subject of their predisposition for racism and greed of power. From their positions of control, they scrutinize and label all other races as they see fit, but rarely, if ever do they evaluate themselves or are evaluated by others. The fact is that within the collective White psyche there is a profoundly well-established predisposition for racism that is matched only by their inclination for deceit, greed and hunger for power. While labeling all other races as savages they have in fact been the most cruelly savage group throughout history. They alone are the most bigheaded and the only race predisposed to racism. All other races have been their enemies or their victims when you take an honest look at their history. Their subjugation, murder and exploitation of all other races are unparalleled in human history.
However, despite possessing a brutal history consumed by unrivaled racism, as well as unjustifiable wars and crimes against humanity the White race is now perceived as being the most ethical and moral racial group of the human family. This grossly inaccurate favorable perception is because the ruling class of Whites have revised and lied about history. From their established positions of power, the White race monopolizes all information production wherever they have control. Prominent Western scholars have always found it necessary to revise history erasing African people from all significant events of the world and while making their race appear more relevant and lesser inhumane. They deliberately disseminate all information that historically and presently implies their White advantage while withholding and suppressing all information that refutes it. As long as it is Whites that are exclusively writing the educational curriculum and keeping the scores on the societal scoreboard of tests they create, they will continue to give Black people fraudulent information that implies Black inferiority and their White pre-eminence. It is a method of control used to maintain White dominance by means of mass manipulation. Since information directly influences our thoughts then this process allows them to control our thoughts through the language and any and all other methods.
Furthermore, this is in fact a very common practice. History acknowledges that the White race’s tendency to deceive and perpetuate false propaganda has an ancient pedigree that lies at the very heart of European culture and identity. Throughout western history, cultures that create and maintain empires have done so by manipulating the people that they are trying to conquer. They go out of their way to make sure that the people that they’re attempting to conquer is perpetually misled and manipulated. Therefore the conquered group’s perception of reality and history is not their own. It is shrewdly imposed upon them without them even knowing it.
There is a profoundly entrenched tendency of the White race to profess equality for all mankind while in fact using every conceivable means to steal or maintain their advantage. Using covert manipulation of Black people was a logical progressive choice in meeting this objective. It is time that more Black people wake up to this reality and ongoing tradition. There is perhaps no place where the White race’s appetite for deceit and propaganda is made clearer than in the history of Western religion. White religious scholars rewrote the African origins of Christianity; thus converting African religion, deities, and important figures of the Bible into European ones, regardless of how absurdly inaccurate. And, what is so remarkable today, even many Black people are so ashamed of themselves and their color that they do not want to even engage in any meaningful exposition of the subject especially from the pulpits that feed Black people every Sunday.
This psychosocial program conditions Black people to accept White dominance over their lives by revising history to hide the historic brutalities committed by the White race against the Black world while revamping all facts to turn themselves into heroes and liberators. To the detriment of many Black people, it has been an extremely effective. These misleading revisions have caused the majority of Black people to function as “mentally asleep” and develop favorable perception of Whites’ contrary of all facts. It has successfully conditioned many Blacks, Browns and African Americans to accept the dominance of Whites and White institutions over their lives by misleading them to believe in White authority. It is at the root of both the profound division and self hatred now afflicting so many Black Americans and is at the heart of internalized feelings of superiority that many Whites possess.
The psychological manipulation of Black people has been so successfully accomplished that it is almost impossible to reverse. It is almost like the Stockholm syndrome where of which the victimized group begins to love their enemy and may feel so indebted towards their oppressors that they may even accept being mistreated. These and other methods of social control are studied as a matter of course by the dominate society. Blacks on the other hand dare not question these social tools for fear of being labeled a subversive, militant, anti American, unpatriotic and not truly an American.
In order for we Black people to overcome the effects of this ongoing mass manipulation scheme that plagues millions within our communities, we must bring our energies and efforts towards countering the effects of this psychosocial treatment of us that is deliberately designed to ensure the continuance of its White dominance and control. The immediate social conditions of Black people the world over will not change as long as we are being manipulated by White societal elites who study us while we fail to study them.
A new reality for African Americans simply will not emerge by implementing outdated strategies, nor will it materialize if we continue to ignore four hundred years of demonstrative evidence affirming that we cannot totally entrust others with the responsibility for our wellbeing, our history and our children especially in the face of what White people have already done and continue to do every day. As long as our lives remain in their hands they will always be the benefactors of their manipulation and we will remain the exploited.
A new reality for African Americans will only be built upon a Black society that dares to take control of the education of their own children, this is imperative. It will never happen as long Whites are allowed to tell us when and if our children are normal or not. For African Americans will never know the genius of their children as long as those children are subjected to a White-controlled, racially biased curriculum that does not prepare them to compete with White children. We have to face the fact that this is done by design and has its roots in a more direct form of racism and bigotry. Following are some examples of what we as a people were able to create despite violence and adversity. This look forward into what I believe we need to achieve again despite possible violence, a sense of common purpose for our own survival. Many of the tactics are being used today in the Political arena even today.
Years 1865 through 1877 in the United States have been named the Reconstruction period. It was during these years that 4 million freed slaves learn what freedom meant. Schools and hospitals open their doors to Black men, women and children for the first time. Black men gained the right to vote; many of them became officials of Southern state governments. Some were elected to the House of Representatives and the Senate. For while it seemed that the doors of equality would really open for the newly freed Black men of America. Instead they soon closed leaving Black Americans on the outside. One of the chief reasons why this happened was the southern state governments soon returned to power and White control after the Reconstruction. White leaders pasted new laws that took away the rights of Black citizens that they had begun to gain in the South. At the same time, groups of White men began to use force and murder as weapons to keep Negroes in bitter poverty and hopeless political weakness.
The leaders of Congress had not expected such things to happen. When the Civil War ended, three amendments to the Constitution seem to give Negroes freedom, the rights of citizens, equal protection of the laws and the right to vote. The 13th amendment was obeyed; no person was held a slave after 1865. The 14th amendment made several promises that would have meaning only if White people were ready to carry them out. The 15th amendment promises that the freed men would have the right to vote.
It took little time for the White leaders of the South to show that they would not permit Black Americans to have such rights. Mississippi passed a law in 1865 setting a state code for Black citizens. Here are some parts of this Black code. No White person may marry any Negro. Freed men who agree to work for a White person and then leave the job for any reason will receive no pay for the work they have already done. If a neighbor quits his job, the police can arrest him and bring him back to the person for whom he had been working. A freed man under 18 can be made and indentured servant of his former master. These children must work for their former masters until they had 21; or, if their females until they’re 18. Any freed man who does not have a job will be fined $50 if he does not have the money for this fine, he will be hired out to anyway person who will pay this fine in exchange for the freed man’s labor. Each person in the state must pay a tax of one dollar. Any Negro who cannot pay this tax can be hired out to any White person who pays the tax for it. No Black person may keep a gun. All the laws in the old slave codes describing and punishing the crimes of slaves made by White people at that time insured that the Negro will still be treated like slaves once again.
In 1865 Congress recognized the unfair treatment of Negroes in the South and was placing them back in slavery and they therefore passed one of the most important laws of the Reconstruction; The Freedman’s Bureau act. The law set up the Freedman’s Bureau headed by the general by Gen. Oliver O Howard; in fact a University was named after him. The Freedman’s Bureau officers were open all over the South. There were put on for five years. The Bureau built more than 4000 schools. It helps of the first Negro colleges Howard University, Fisk University Canton University and Atlanta University. Gen. Howard and those working with him built more than 40 hospitals. These were different from any other hospitals in the South for the admitted Black patients as well as White ones. For many Black Americans their visit to such hospitals where the first medical care they had ever known!
White leaders from the South asked Congress to close down the Freedman’s Bureau. They attacked Gen. Howard. Southern politician and said he was not honest. They insisted he was trying to make himself rich. These and many other charges were made again and again. The end of the Bureau came in 1870. It had given a great assistance to 4 million Black Americans. Some of them had become independent of their old masters for all time. They had found the beginnings of real dignity in their daily lives. They had earned and learned trades and had begun their education in schools of higher education. For the first time, they had gained the right to vote. Voting could lead to equality and Southern Whites took steps to deny this right to all Black Americans.
One group in the South Carolina sent this protester message to Congress in 1868 to explain why it was ready to do anything to prevent Negroes from taking part in government. The low slaves of yesterday are the freed man of today. We do not mean to threaten resistance by arms. But the White people of our state will never allow Negro rule. We will keep up this fight until we have won back control. White people believed that they were the proud White race, whose rule on Earth God has ordered.
Groups of White men in the South took steps to regain full control. Organizations like the Ku Klux Klan were soon feared all over the south. Its members wanted to return Negroes to position close to slavery. Their method was terror. They hung, burned, whipped and killed with no moral regret, to bring that about. The Freedman’s Bureau was gone after 1870. By 1877 all New Orleans soldiers had left.
A new agreement seemed to give the South back to its old White leaders. The North would keep control of the national government; the White men of the South would do as they pleased in their own states. The White race controlling the Black race and keeping his White power in every possible way was the rule of the day.
On February 26, 1877, a deal was struck that would profoundly affect the course of history for Black people in America. No other event, not the Civil War, not the Emancipation Proclamation, so specifically and directly affected the future status of Blacks as a whole in America. The agreement stated that if Rutherford B Hayes were awarded the presidency he would remove the federal troops in the South, and the former southern slaveholding class would be free to return to power and establish new forms of slavery free from federal oversight or control.
In November 1876 America was under pressure and struggling with the fiercely contested presidential election. The candidates appeared to be tied in polls were being challenged amid charges of fraud and voter intimidation. The Congress was disrupted to the point of disorder as threats of secession and sectional the people filled the chambers. At the root of the contract was once again, the fate of a Black man. So the legislators began to a filibuster and threaten national disorder and even Civil War again if they were not awarded the presidency. Samuel J Tilden ran against Rutherford B Hayes in that election. So the legislators began a filibuster that threatened national disorder and even Civil War if there meant Tilden was not awarded the presidency.
After many days of political chaos, group of politicians from both parties secretly convened at the Worthy hotel in Washington to attempt to resolve the conflict and save the union from political disaster. The agreement stated that if Hayes were awarded the presidency, he would remove the federal troops in the South, and the former southern slaveholding class would be free to return to power and establish new forms of slavery free from federal oversight or control.
The compromise of 1877 was a great betrayal of democracy and the Negro people. This was the Political treachery that reduced Black people to a state of economic poverty and political impotence. So, you can clearly see that the powers that operate behind the scenes have every intention to continue to exploit Black and Brown people as long as they can. Even today you see bold attempts to regain power in the South and across the country. Even the Supreme Court has now gutted the Voting Rights Act and opened the door to new laws in numerous States being created almost overnight.
The use of force against Negroes became part of everyday life. Lynching, or murder by mobs, took the place of law in town after town. This remained true for more than 60 years! The Lynch law stole justice from Black Americans. Negroes are dragged before the court by the thousands sentenced to every form of punishment, and even killed, without proper trials. Negroes in some parts of the country are arrested in jail just because they’re suspected of crimes. Mobs then form, made up of ignorant, vicious and drunken men. There given the keys to the jails. The accused Negro was then tortured, hanged, shot or caught up in the most horrible ways. This is happened thousands of times! Such mobs have even walked into court rooms take their prisoners. As late as 1930, 20 Negroes were killed by mobs. In each case a man was accused of the crime. He did not get to trial. Instead, a mob of angry White men killed him. None of the men in those mobs were ever punished for what they had done.
BILOXI, Miss., June 10—Lynch law ran rampant in this section last night. Two negro men were lynched, possibly for one man’s crime, early this morning at Mississippi City, and it is not absolutely certain that either victim of mob law was guilty. Henry Askew and Ed Russ, held as suspects, were taken out and strung up to a tree in a thicket, just behind the railway station at Mississippi City. Attorney White had promised that they would be brought to trial on Monday and yesterday at a mass meeting held in this city urged the people to support the laws and see that justice was done through the proper legal channels. Early last night Sheriff Ramsey, in order to protect Askew and Russ from mob violence, moved them to a bath house. After midnight the mob assembled near the bath house and afterward overpowered a deputy sheriff with whom the sheriff thought to protect his prisoners, and dragged the two negroes away. The crowd, which was supposed to know nothing of the negroes’ hiding place, did not stop at the jail, but went straight to the bath house. The negroes were tied back to back and swung up to the same tree. Their bodies were riddled with bullets, and after death ensued, were set on fire. The nauseating smell of the burning flesh could be smelt for miles around.
Ginzburg, Ralph (2013-06-02). 100 Years of Lynchings (Kindle Locations 564-571). Black Classic Press. Kindle Edition.
NEWMAN, Ga., Apr. 23—Sam Holt, the murderer of Alfred Cranford and the ravisher of the latter’s wife, was burned at the stake, near Newnan, Ga., this afternoon, in the presence of 2000 people. The black man was first tortured before being covered with oil and burned. An ex-governor of Georgia made a personal appeal to his townspeople to let the law take its course, but without the slightest avail. Before the torch was applied to the pyre, the negro was deprived of his ears, fingers and genital parts of his body. He pleaded pitifully for his life while the mutilation was going on, but stood the ordeal of fire with surprising fortitude. Before the body was cool, it was cut to pieces, the bones were crushed into small bits, and even the tree upon which the wretch met his fate was torn up and disposed of as “souvenirs.” The Negro’s heart was cut into several pieces, as was also his liver. Those unable to obtain the ghastly relics direct paid their more fortunate possessors extravagant sums for them. Small pieces of bones went for 25 cents, and a bit of the liver crisply cooked sold for 10 cents. As soon as the Negro was seen to be dead there was a tremendous struggle among the crowd, which had witnessed his tragic end, to secure the souvenirs.
Ginzburg, Ralph (2013-06-02). 100 Years of Lynchings (Kindle Locations 254-258). Black Classic Press. Kindle Edition.
Colfax, Louisiana
On April 13, 1873, the United States experienced one of the worst one-day slaughters of Blacks by Whites in its history. This violence erupted in Colfax, Louisiana. The White League, a paramilitary group intent on securing White rule in Louisiana, clashed with Louisiana’s almost all-black state militia. Armed White men attacked lightly armed African American freedmen who had assembled in a local courthouse to defend their elected officeholders. The resulting death toll was staggering. Only three members of the White League died. But some 100 black men were killed in the encounter. Of those, nearly half were murdered in cold blood after they had already surrendered.
Despite the murder and shocking bloodshed in Louisiana there was the unfair resolution to the matter. The Northern public opinion was outraged in the beginning. The Grant administration vowed swift punishment for the guilty. Louisiana Whites rallied around those who initiated the massacre. As the costs both financial and political mounted the Northern government lost interest. Without the financial and military support needed only three men out of the ninety eight were indicted and that was thrown out by the Supreme Court which indicated to the Klan that the courts would protect them, no matter what they did. The decision by the Supreme Court dealt a lasting blow to federal law enforcement authority throughout the South.
White Louisianans systematically distorted the event, blaming rampant “Negroes” for provoking their own murders. This cover-up, unfortunately, was assisted for many years by historians, Northern and Southern, who taught that Reconstruction had collapsed due to its own misguided attempt to include unworthy Black men in government. Since it was White people writing the stories that became history it is no wonder that every event favored the White majority population.
Reconstruction in Louisiana failed because it was resisted, in the courts, using lawyers, Judges and terrorism through the use of the Ku Klux Klan. Eventually, the U.S. government retreated from the post-Civil War South. The South pressed and pushed on Republicans until they splintered. The Confederate States of America lost the Civil War but the South won Reconstruction.
Black Wall Street
Black Wall Street was the name fittingly given to one of the most affluent all Black Communities in America that was bombed from the air and burned to the ground by mobs of envious Whites. In a period spanning fewer than 12 hours, a once thriving Black Business District in northern Tulsa lay smoldering. It was a model Community that was destroyed and a major African-American economic movement resoundingly defused. The night’s carnage left some estimates of 3,000 African Americans dead and over 600 successful businesses lost. Among these were 21 Churches, 21 Restaurants, 30 Grocery Stores and 2 Movie Theaters, plus a Hospital, a Bank, a Post Office, Libraries, Schools, Law Offices, a half dozen Private Airplanes and even a bus System.
Black Tulsa Oklahoma called Black Wall Street had undertakers, garages and filling stations, real estate agents and loan companies, insurance companies, builders and contractors, dressmakers, shoemakers and repair shops, ten tailors, one printer with $25,000 worth of equipment, twelve barbers, three hairdressers and beauty salons, five cleaners, a number of plumbers, one upholsterer, two photographers and one jeweler. The two Black theatres one, according to one source, had 700 seats, in addition there were several doctors, lawyers and professionals.
In a period spanning fewer than 12 hours, a once thriving Black business district in northern Tulsa lay smoldering a model community destroyed. The night’s carnage left some 3,000 African Americans dead and over 600 successful businesses lost. Among these were two movie theaters, plus a hospital, a bank, a post office, libraries, schools, law offices, a half dozen private airplanes and even a bus system. It proved that African Americans if just given a chance, could create a successful infrastructure. The community was so tight and wealthy because they traded dollars hand to hand and because they were dependent upon one another as a result of the Jim Crow laws. It was not unusual that if a resident’s home accidentally burned down, it could be rebuilt within a few weeks by neighbors. At least 3 Blacks had fortunes of $1 million each.
On May 30 1921, Sarah Page, a white 17 year old went to the police with an incendiary story. She told them that Dick Rowland, a Black man, “criminally assaulted her” in an elevator in the Drexel Building. The police found that Rowland had accidentally stepped on her foot, she slapped him.
The following day, June 1, 1921, began with sinister threats against the Black community culminating with 10,000 armed whites invaded the Black district. Initially 60 to 80 cars formed a circle around the Black district. Each vehicle contained pistols, rifles, machine guns, and petrol bombs. 8 airplanes were also used in the assault. They were used as reconnaissance and to drop bombs of nitro-glycerin. Among those who attacked were “men in uniform” who carried oil and petrol into the Black district.
June 2, 1921, the following day, saw thousands of homeless Black families encamped on the hills surrounding Tulsa. It is known that 120 Blacks were buried following the assault. In addition, numerous Black corpses were piled onto trucks and driven away. It is said that other Blacks were buried in mass graves and other bodies were dumped in a nearby river. The Red Cross, from what they saw, estimated that 300 people died other estimates reached 3000.
Newspapers added to white fears by publishing a daily litany of alleged racial attacks and alleged rapes against white women. A day seldom went by during the period from 1917 to 1923 in which an incident of this kind was not reported in headlines on the front pages. Violent retribution was the accepted manner of response in the South, in particular, but also in the North for crimes against white women. Lynching steadily escalated from 38 in 1917 to 58 in 1918. During the period from 1918 to 1927, lynch mobs took the lives of 454 persons, of whom 416 were African American. In Florida, 47 black citizens were lynched during the same period. It was open season on African Americans, with minute violations of southern racial codes often sufficient to warrant execution. So violent did the communities become that public notices were placed in newspapers inviting people to come and watch the burning of a live Negro.
The Wilmington Race Riot
The Wilmington Race Riot Report says Wilmington Race Riot Commission concluded that the riot was a politically motivated attack by Whites against the city’s leading African American citizens. The Wilmington Race Riot of 1898 documents the lengths to which Southern White Democrats went to regain political domination of the South after Reconstruction. The 1898 Wilmington North Carolina Race Riot left the Port City in racial ruins. The violence was part of a statewide effort to put White Democrats in office and stem the political advances of Black citizens, according to a draft report released Thursday by the state-appointed Wilmington Race Riot Commission.
Wilmington’s African-American population was a complex society in the 1870s and 1880s with cultural, social, educational, civic, business and political advances. African-Americans played a vital role in Wilmington’s economic and political landscape. The city’s Black businesses grew at a faster pace than in any other North Carolina city, and Black workers flocked to the city. In 1897, more than 1,000 Blacks owned property here.
Despite intimidation from White Democrats, 2,965 Blacks registered for the November 1898 election in Wilmington. There wasn’t any widespread violence on the Nov. 8 Election Day. Democrats won by a wide margin. It was reported that the ballot boxes were stuffed to guarantee a White victory.
On Nov. 9, a large group of Whites met, and a series of resolutions were passed, forcing some Blacks out of town. This included Alex Manly, editor of the city’s only Black newspaper, the “Record”. A Committee of Twenty-Five was selected to put into action the “White Declaration of Independence.” Sound familiar, the tea party, take our country back! The committee summoned not requested, Black leaders and the Committee of Colored Citizens to meet that night and prepare a response to its demands. The Black committee sought to prevent violence, but its response was not delivered by the 7:30 a.m. Nov. 10 deadline.
Alfred M. Waddell, leader of the White committee, met a crowd of men at the Wilmington Light Infantry armory at 8 a.m. Nov. 10. Waddell led a march to the “Record” printing offices at the corner of Seventh and Nun streets. A mob of almost 2,000 Whites destroyed the offices by fire. Violence between groups of Blacks and Whites broke out shortly afterward at the corner of Fourth and Harnett streets. Several Black men were identified as killed or wounded in sporadic fights. About 22 were reported dead. No official count exists because of a lack of records. No White casualties have been reported.
Statewide election returns had recently signaled a shift in power with Democrats taking over the North Carolina State Legislature. The city of Wilmington, however, remained in Republican hands primarily because of its solid base of African American voters. On November 10th, Alfred Moore Waddell, a former Confederate officer and a White supremacist, led a group of townsmen to force the ouster of Wilmington’s city officials. During the riot, Waddell’s committee and others facilitated the sudden violent overthrow of government officials and the seizure of political power to overthrow the Republican mayor, Board of Aldermen and police chief. By 4 p.m., the elected officials were resigning and replaced by men selected from the White committee. Waddell was elected mayor by the new board. All Black municipal employees were fired. Prominent African-American leaders and businessmen, and White Republicans, were banned from the city starting the afternoon of Nov. 10. Families also left the city voluntarily during the following weeks. Blacks who remained lost their political standing and suffered economic setbacks.
Over the next two years North Carolina passed the “grandfather clause,” as one in a series of laws designed to limit the voting rights of American Americans. The Grandfather Clause was enacted by seven southern states during and after the reconstruction era to prevent freedmen from voting. The clause, designed to negate the 15th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution which allowed Black men to vote, significantly reduced African American political participation well into the 20th Century. Starting in Louisiana in 1898 and working its way into laws and constitutions in seven other states by 1910, the Grandfather Clause stated that all men or lineal descendants of men who were voters before 1867 did not have to meet the educational, property, or tax requirements for voting then in existence. This effectively allowed all White males to vote while denying the franchise to Black men and other men of color. The Grandfather Clause, with its voting denial, became the centerpiece of a much larger system of discrimination and racial segregation.
State leaders did not respond to the violence in Wilmington. No state investigation was done. A federal investigation was opened; files were closed with no indictments in 1900. Waddell and the Board of Aldermen were officially elected in March 1899 with no Republican resistance. The violence left many Blacks dead or injured. The report documents the deaths of 22 Blacks. There are no White fatalities documented.
The Atlanta Race Riot
The Atlanta Race Riot or Atlanta Riot of 1906 was the first race riot to take place in the capital city of Georgia. The riot lasted from September 22 to September 24.
The laws maintained separate Black and White neighborhoods, segregated public transportation, and segregated schools. Despite these hurdles and Jim Crow laws, a small number of Black families achieved a significant measure of success. Black men voted during Reconstruction and continued to do so after their counterparts were pushed off the rolls throughout the rest of the South. The growing Black middle class made many White citizens uncomfortable but they were also wary of rising crime rates and the perceived threat of Black men against White women.
On September 22, after four alleged sexual attacks on White women by Black men were reported in the local White press, a mob of approximately 10,000 White men formed downtown. The mob surged through Black Atlanta neighborhoods destroying businesses and assaulting hundreds of Black men. The violence became so dangerous that the state militia was called in to take control of the city. Still, some White groups persisted in attacking Black neighborhoods, and Black men organized to defend their homes and families.
Though not known for sure, the estimated number of Blacks killed was between 25 and 40 while two White Americans were killed. Hundreds more people were injured or saw businesses and homes destroyed. Black residential neighborhoods became increasingly racially isolated following the riot.
The Rosewood Race Riot
The Rosewood Case, one of the worst race riots in American history, in which hundreds of angry Whites killed an undetermined number of Blacks and burnt down their Florida community. In 1922 Rosewood, Florida was a small, predominantly Black town. During the winter of 1922, two events in the vicinity of Rosewood aggravated local race relations: the murder of a White schoolteacher in nearby Perry, which led to the murder of three Blacks, and a Ku Klux Klan rally in Gainesville on New Year’s Eve.
On New Year’s Day of 1923, Fannie Taylor, a young White woman living in Sumner, claimed that a Black man sexually assaulted her in her home. A small group of Whites began searching for a recently escaped Black convict named Jesse Hunter, whom they believed to be responsible. They incarcerated one suspected accomplice, Aaron Carrier, and lynched another, Sam Carter. A group of 20 to 30 White men went to Sylvester Carrier’s house to confront him. They shot his dog, and when his mother, Sarah, stepped outside to talk with the men, they shot her.
Sylvester killed two men and wounded four in the shoot-out that ensued. After the men left, the women and children, who prior to this had gathered in Carrier’s house for protection, fled to the swamp where the majority of Rosewood’s residents had already sought refuge. The White men returned to Carrier’s house the following evening. After a brief shoot-out, they entered the house, found the bodies of Sarah Carrier and a Black man whom they believed to be Sylvester Carrier, and set the residence on fire.
The men then proceeded to rampage through Rosewood, torching other buildings and slaughtering animals. They were joined by a mob of about 200 Whites who converged on Rosewood after finding out that a Black man had killed two Whites. That night two local White train conductors, John and William Bryce, who knew all of Rosewood’s residents, picked up the Black women and children and took them to Gainesville. John Wright, a White general store owner who hid a number of Black women and children in his home during the riot, planned and helped carries out this evacuation effort.
By the end of the weekend all of Rosewood was leveled except for the Wright house and the general store. Although the state of Florida claimed that only eight people died in the Rosewood riot—two Whites and six Blacks—testimonies by survivors suggest that more African Americans perished. No one was charged with the Rosewood murders. After the riot, the town was deserted and even Blacks living in surrounding communities moved out of the area.
Philomena Carrier, who had been working with her grandmother Sarah Carrier at Fannie Taylor’s house at the time of the alleged sexual assault, claimed that the man responsible was a White railroad engineer. Present-day family members, including Arnett Turner Goins, declare that Sarah Carrier remembered having seen the same man visit Fannie Taylor on several previous occasions. She says that the man had come to see Taylor the morning of January 1 after her husband left for work. After an argument erupted between Taylor and the man, Philomena witnessed the man exit the back door and jog down the road toward Rosewood. Some African Americans in the area contended privately at the time, even as Black descendants contend publicly today, that the man who visited Fannie Taylor was her White lover. For some reason they quarreled, and after physically abusing her, the man left. Then the White woman protected herself by fabricating the story of being attacked by a Black man. I know you have heard this story before, White women claiming a Black man did this or that.
The Carriers’ descendants maintain that the man was a Mason and that he persuaded Aaron Carrier, a member of Rosewood’s Black Masonic lodge, to help him escape by appealing to the society’s code requiring members to help one another regardless of race. Carrier in turn persuaded another Black Mason, Sam Carter—one of the few men in Rosewood with a wagon—to pick up the White man at Carrier’s house and drop him off in the swamp. From there the man disappeared without a trace.
Although the Rosewood riot received national coverage in the New York Times and the Washington Post as it unfolded, it was neglected by historians. Survivors of Rosewood did not come forward to tell their story because of the shame they felt for having been connected with the riot. They also kept silent out of fear of being persecuted or killed. In 1993 the Florida Department of Law Enforcement conducted an investigation into the case, and this led to the drafting of a bill to compensate the survivors of the massacre.
After an extended debate and several hearings, the Rosewood Bill, which awarded $150,000 to each of the riot’s nine eligible Black survivors, was passed in April 1994. In spite of the state’s financial compensation, the survivors remained frightened. When asked if he would go back to Rosewood, survivor Wilson Hall said, “No, They still don’t want me down there.”
Black newspapers universally denounced the events in Rosewood and blamed southern society for the persistence of racial violence. A Black newspaper in St. Louis, Missouri, The Argus, explained why violence against Blacks, as in Rosewood, occurred: “When a mob goes out to lynch a victim it knows when it is forming, that unless by accident not one of their number will be hurt physically, and that no mental anguish will come to anyone by being arrested or subjected to a fine or jail sentence.” Therefore, The Argus contended, “There will always be mob violence and lynching just so long as mob members can satisfy their blood lust on a certain class of people, knowing that not one of their numbers will be punished by the constituted authorities of the law.”
We are at the crossroads of a major decision about which way we will proceed to order our lives in the future. And, what is so pitiful is that many are caught up in the dream of being a better American without being a better African American and there is a difference. You can do both, be a better African American community and a better American. But, we can no longer survive as a race by desperately hanging on to continual perpetual lies. A reality of truth must prevail if we are to be a part of the future. And, the truth must be told from the pulpit to the classroom. We can no longer afford to be held in check by fear. What is it that keeps us from facing and talking about the truth?
The choice is clearly between the continuation of the current social and personal state of things or conscious intervention to change it and build a better society and more life affirming, moral, and meaningful relationships with our God, our people, and selves. Our goals are not to conquer other people; our goal should be to conquer our created negative selves.
Whatever the decision may be, we should not be deluded into believing that the consequences are individual ones, for the future of our race is at stake collectively. Nor is the problem an easy one because the damage upon the psyches of many African Americans will not vanish overnight.
I know that it has taken me almost a lifetime of study and searching to find the truth about myself, my history and my place in the world. It will be hard to remove the damage done to us especially given that the destruction of the Black psyche has been happening for more than four hundred years and is still occurring. Nevertheless, we cannot survive as a race being unconcerned about this problem. We must act now, because to remain indifferent is to assure the destruction of our children. There is in fact neither a struggle nor fight more pressing for African Americans today than the annihilation of this real life Black Matrix that is used to suppress us, confuse us, and turn us against each other. Therefore, this is in no way a problem that we can afford to leave for yet another generation. This is one that we must fight and win now or die trying. Liberation from our despair depends upon it.
Exposing this real life Matrix created for the Black mind is not at all about inflaming racial hatred and anti-White sentiments. No sane person in the African American community desires this. It is about informing our communities about what is being deliberately done to us under the guise of national interest so that they may stop accepting these hardships and instead confront them and do whatever we can to change what is happening to us. What are you prepared to do? Remember, you can educate yourself to educate another!
Many have wondered why the White ruling elites find it a necessity to always reinvent methods of suppressing its Black population. According to renowned author and psychologist Dr. Frances Cress Welsing, the reason may lie in following the fact: White people are less than 1/10th of the world population, and they possess a recessive characteristic that is a variation of albinism. This genetic recessive characteristic means that, through miscegenation, the White population can conceivably be genetically annihilated by people of color. Therefore the more color that a particular group has to cause White genetic annihilation the more that group is perceived as their enemy and targeted. According to this view point the very survival of White people necessitates that they project genetic inferiority on people of color particularly its Black population. The White race’s necessity to always reinvent racist suppressive systems created against the advancement of Black people is subconsciously connected to this fact.
This was included almost word for word from The Black Matrix © 2006 by Franklin G. Jones
The Bible and History
Pope Leo XIII in his encyclical Providentissimus Deus… reaffirmed the decisions of the Council of Trent and emphasized that the Bible in all its parts was inspired and that a stated fact must be accepted as falling under inspiration, down to the most insignificant item; that is, the whole Bible is the Word of God. And, since that was the Catholic Churches position it would be best that you “believe” that then, under the threat of death or torture etc.
Some literalist or conservative Christians today teach that the Bible is without error in every way in all matters: chronology, history, biology, sociology, psychology, politics, physics, math, art, and so on. Other Christians believe that the Scriptures are always right (do not err) only in fulfilling their primary purpose: revealing God, God’s vision, God’s purposes, and God’s good news to humanity.
If every word in the collection of books called the Bible is the word of God then women should keep quiet in church. They must take a subordinate place in their relationship with their husbands. If they want to find out anything they should ask their husbands at home because it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in church. Try telling that to your wife and tell her God says so because its written in the Bible and see and hear what happens!!
Most people who are questioned about the origin of the documents and ideas of the Bible say that God wrote them. Some say God inspired men and prophets to write these books. Others say God put the words in their mind and spirit as they wrote. Most Christians do not want to be asked or questioned about anything that would make them think beyond what the composers of the biblical books want them to know and believe. We have been made to believe that thinking beyond or outside the Bible to try to understand our own religious faith is blasphemous.
During the 1970s and ’80s, there was a growing debate in theological circles centered on the issue of whether or not the Bible was infallible or both infallible and inerrant. Some Christian seminaries, such as Princeton Theological Seminary and Fuller Theological Seminary, were formally adopting the doctrine of infallibility while rejecting the doctrine of inerrancy. I personally subscribe to this view, that there are errors in the collection of books eventually to be called the Bible but it can lead you to experience the Almighty. If you seek God with your heart you will find Him. But, the minute I get into a discussion with any Christians about the bible, myself being also a Christian, to say anything about errors in the bible may make me several things in their mind, a demon, a blasphemer etc.
In my opinion it is necessary to study the origin of ideas upon which society is based. Since there were earlier civilizations with profound thought, science and spiritual understanding, we go to those writings for a clearer understanding of African/Kemetic/Egyptian thought. You cannot see the copy of today unless you see the original from antiquity. If your response to this research is negative, you will not be able to move into the past and examine your roots. It’s because your mind has been trained to respond that way, whether you believe that or not, so, how do you feel about the word Africa? If it is negative then you were trained to think and react that way.
It is clear that civilization began on the African Continent. But, while we are many times, not interested in our own Ancient history, European nations have been digging around in Africa, Egypt and Ethiopia for uncounted years and know much more about Blacks than we Blacks know about ourselves. Black people know something is wrong today but seldom do they realize or understand that what has happened was intentional, systematic, sophisticated, sustained and a pervasive in their attempt to destroy the magnificent powerful image of the African image and mind. Remember your mind cannot be programmed if you are aware that someone may be trying to program your mind. That is why it is so important to know who you are through your history and their great contributions to the advancement of human beings. That, is true freedom and liberation.
Various forms of media, books, newspapers, television, movies and radio, converged upon the Black mind to destroy it. Of course you are compelled to ask the question why was the European so obsessed with the need to create a misrepresented African personality.
We have to look to the beginnings of humanity to answer that question because at that time there was only one people on the face of the earth and they were all Africans. For the first four million to five million years of hominid existence on the face of the earth, people were all located only on the continent of Africa and they were basically the same biological stock. There was no other continent that was populated.
There is no information to support the origin of humans anywhere else in the world. The first man and woman stood on their feet in Africa, not Asia or anywhere else. According to geologists, Africa was the center of the worlds land masses 175 million years ago. Geologists explained that by continental drifts the continents began to form, but Africa still remained at the center of the land masses. To answer the question; Europeans do not want the world to “know” that Black people created so many brilliant wonderful things in every facet of life. It’s a mind game!
Let’s take a look at one of the ways African/American minds have been manipulated. The term minority is an example of perceptual distortion because the Black people they call minorities are not minorities. Black people are the majority in the world, especially if you count the most recent African Blacks anywhere in the world. There are a little over a billion people on the continent of Africa; 60 million are in Brazil which is the largest African population outside the continent of Africa along with 33 million in the United States. If you include India, there is a large African population in India called Dravidians. There are also African populations that are spread throughout the pacific and when you add all those up how do they amount to a minority?
European historians have said things like this: Black people are the only group of people on the face of the earth that has never created a civilization. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel who was a German philosopher and a major figure in German idealism wrote about Africa. His historical account of reality revolutionized European philosophy. He said that Africa is no part of human history, that anything we see in Africa that’s historical belongs to the Asiatic or European world. According to him what we see in Africa as history that is located in Egypt doesn’t belong to Africa. Also, that what we know of Africa belongs to the underdeveloped period still on the threshold of human history. He then went on to create an area later called the “middle east,” so that North Africa could be attached to Europe. There were others who went on to say that North Africa was populated by “dark skinned Caucasians.” One of the reasons that cause people to believe that Egypt is a White civilization rather than a Black civilization is because most of the information they promote in their historical view is of the last dynasty, the Greco-Roman dynasty and not the first Black dynasties. Add to that the movies with European actors playing Egyptians, magazines like National Geographic that display Egyptians with long straight hair and European features slightly colored like Hawaiians. No wonder you grow up with a distorted view of racial history.
Europeans began changing the image the origin of Egypt’s African civilization and the race of the people who founded that civilization in order to provide the rationale and justification for the slave trade and its horrific de-humanization of African people. The strategy was to deny ancient Egyptian’s African identity, so that they could deny Africans any abilities to build a civilization. This was done by colonizing the information about the ancient Egyptian history. By colonizing the information about the achievements of Africans in ancient world, they began to project a picture of themselves as the only race that has been responsible for civilization, culture and progress.
With a negative picture of the Africans they hoped to oppress them and convince them that they deserved to be oppressed because they had not contributed to the civilization of humanity, thus the need to be civilized.
This information comes from the Easton’s 1897 Bible Dictionary which is still used on many Bible programs and Bible sources for historical purposes. This goes to prove how other people “see” us and the reason for this book.
“The Egyptians belonged to the White race, and their original home is still a matter of dispute. Many scholars believe that it was in Southern Arabia, and recent excavations have shown that the valley of the Nile was originally inhabited by a low-class population, perhaps belonging to the Nigritian stock, before the Egyptians of history entered it.”
Most history classes in America are centered on European history and presented under the European context. African slavery and colonization were presented as the western divine mission to civilize Africans who were described as savages, uncivilized without history, language, and culture. According to the popular view, Africans have been savages and barbarians up to the arrival of Europeans who brought civilization to Africa. We grew up with this conception of the African savage that Europe injected into Africans mind using violence, racism, social injustice, and economical inequality. Many of us who grew up under the colonial education system did not understand the conditions the Africans were in during the slave trade and the colonial period.
We as people of African descent must become aware of their achievements made to human civilization. This knowledge will help us to determine the course of our lives through the process of liberating ourselves from the chains of traditional falsehood. This knowledge will break down the falsehood about African people and to help destroy the racist assertions of our so-called inherent incapability as African people to build a civilization. This knowledge will help the non-African world rediscover the African people in the story of human development throughout the history of the world.
The assault on the Black mind, the Black intelligence and Black history, was and still is a major undertaking; what is the reason for this? With their control of the print media everyone is guided to look towards Europe as the source or the origin of mankind. So in effect you have had over 400 years of attempting to justify the enslavement of the African population by presenting Africans as savages and in need of civilization. And, too many people today have inherited that opinion about Black people which they continue to believe to this day. They believe that Africa and Africans have contributed nothing on the world’s stage of progress and they have received no contradictory information in the American school system that would lead them to believe anything else.
Africa
Africa is itself the cradle of civilization. It is important for all people in the world to know that Africa was the first and earliest civilization for which there are fairly complete records. Africans created what was later called the Black African Kemetic civilization later called Egypt. But what is more remarkable is that Egypt was the child of older civilizations both by its own admission and historical records. Ethiopia is a Greek word which describes the people south of Egypt meaning burnt face or Black skinned people. Professor Basil Davidson a noted historian made the following disclosure, “the Greeks knew well and firmly believe that the original Egyptians were Black people who had come from the South to settle in the land of the Nile. Even Aristotle says that the Egyptians were very Black and the Ethiopians woolly haired.”
What is very clear is that the beginning of what we call civilization moved down the Nile originating in the heart of Africa. The builders of civilization came from the heart of Africa first in Cush/Ethiopia then building Kemet/Egypt and from Kemet to Asia, Babylonia and finally into the rest of the world. Even the pyramids were built starting from the interior of Africa and moving out towards the coast.
The stories we hear in Sunday school form the basis for the popular belief that Jewish slaves were forced to build the pyramids in Egypt, but they were saved when they left Egypt in a mass Exodus. I was raised to believe that story, and it’s what’s been repeated innumerable times by Hollywood especially during the holidays. In 1956, Charlton Heston as Moses went head to head with Yul Brynner as Pharaoh Ramses II in The Ten Commandments. Moses placed into the Nile in a basket as a baby to escape death by Ramses’ proclamation that all newborn Hebrew sons be killed.
In 1977, Israeli Prime Minister Meacham Begin visited Egypt’s National Museum in Cairo. He stated “We built the pyramids.” Perhaps to the surprise of a lot of people, this sparked indignation throughout the Egyptian people, proud that they had built the pyramids. The belief that Jews built the pyramids may be famous throughout Christian and Jewish populations, but it’s certainly not the way anyone in Egypt sees this historic event.
I’ve heard some Christians say the Bible is a literal, inerrant, historical document, thus Jewish slaves built the pyramids. The Bible in fact doesn’t bring up the pyramids at all, this came from Herodotus and there’s no evidence that there were ever Jews in ancient Egypt.
Terms like Jew and Hebrew are not the same thing. A Jew is someone who practices the Jewish religion. A Semite is a member of an ethnic group characterized by any of the Semitic languages including Arabic, Hebrew, Assyrian, and many smaller groups throughout Africa and the Middle East. A Hebrew is someone who speaks the Hebrew language and was the group of people who, according to the Bible, entered Egypt. An Israelite is a citizen of Israel. You can be some or all of these things. An Israelite need not be a Jew, and a Jew need not be a Hebrew.
Bewilderment over the use of these terms complicates research. Hebrews could be well incorporated into a non-Jewish society, but modern reporting might refer to them as Jews, which can be significantly misleading. When asked by Rabbi David Nesenoff of RabbiLive.com if she had “any comments on Israel,” Thomas replied, “Tell them to get the hell out of Palestine.” Thomas went on to say that the Palestinian people “are occupied and it’s their land” and that Israelis should “go home”—to Poland, Germany, America “and everywhere else.”
Helen Thomas is an American author and former news service reporter, a former member of the White House Press Corps and opinion columnist of Lebanese Greek Orthodox/Mel kite descent. She said that because she knows that the European Jews you see in Israel are really converted to the religion of Judaism and they are Europeans not from the house of Judah.
I grew up and went to High School with a majority of European Jews. I thought that they were the Jews of the Bible and of course Charlton Heston, (the ten commandments and Judah Ben Hur), looked like them and so did Cleopatra so what was I to think growing up. My parents did not know who they are so they could not tell me. I did not find out until I was a grown man and started asking questions and doing some research myself.
Today, we also know quite a lot more about the labor force that built the pyramids. The best estimates are that 10,000 men spent 30 years building the Great Pyramid. They lived in good housing at the foot of the pyramid, and when they died, they received honored burials in stone tombs near the pyramid in thanks for their contribution. This information is relatively new, as the first of these worker tombs was only discovered in 1990 and was in an article of the National Geographic. They ate well and received the best medical care. And, also unlike slaves, they were well paid. The pyramid builders were recruited and worked shifts of three months. Farmers worked during the months when the Nile flooded their farms, distributing the Pharaoh’s wealth out to where it was needed most. Because of archaeological evidence, virtually every fact about the workers that archaeology has shown us totally rules out the use of slave labor on the pyramids.
It wasn’t until almost 2,000 years after the Great Pyramid were built that the earliest known record shows confirmation of Jews in Egypt, and they were neither Hebrews nor Israelites. They were a garrison of soldiers from the Persian Empire, stationed on Elephantine, an island in the Nile, beginning in about 650 BC. They fought alongside the Pharaoh’s soldiers in the Nubian campaign, and later became the principal trade portal between Egypt and Nubia. Their history is known from the Elephantine Papyri discovered in 1903, which are in Aramaic, not Hebrew; and their religious beliefs appear to have been a mixture of Judaism and pagan polytheism.
The Elephantine Papyri are a collection of ancient Jewish manuscripts dating from the 5th century BC. They come from a Jewish community at Elephantine, and then called Yeb an island in the Nile at the border of Nubia. It was probably founded as a military installation in about 650 BC. The Jewish community was among soldiers stationed at Elephantine under Persian rule, 495-399 BC. Archival records recovered include proof that they observed Shabbat and Passover, and also records of interfaith marriages. Other documentation also identifies the Elephantine garrison as the earliest immigration of Jews into Egypt. The Letter of Aristeas, written in Greece in the second century BC, records that Jews had been sent into Egypt to assist Pharaoh Psammetichus I in his campaign against the Nubians. Psammetichus I ruled Egypt from 664 to 610 BC, which perfectly matches the archaeological dating of the Elephantine garrison in 650. This evidence is the first firm evidence that shows Jews in Egypt, well after the building of the pyramids.
When writing is taken as a prerequisite for civilization, the oldest civilization or the “cradle” of civilization is Early Dynastic Egypt followed by Sumer. The ancient city states of Mesopotamia in the Fertile Crescent are most cited by Western and Middle Eastern scholars as the cradle of civilization. The theory that Mesopotamia is the cradle of civilization has enjoyed some credence. But, the rise of dynastic Egypt in the Nile Valley occurred with the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt in approximately 3200 BC, and ended at around 343 BC, at the start of the Achaemenid dynasty’s control of Egypt. As to the matter of writing the Sumerian hieroglyphs have long seemed slightly older than the Egyptian ones. But since the discovery of the tomb of the Naqadan king “Scorpion I” (tomb U-j at the Umm el-Qaab in Abydos), this is no longer true. Not only that but archaeologists in Sudan are unearthing one of the world’s oldest civilizations—an ancient kingdom which began to flourish 5,000 years ago, hundreds of miles to the south of ancient Egypt.
Egyptologist Gerald Massey (1828-1907). Born in wretched poverty in England, Gerald Massey was almost completely self-taught. Despite his lack of formal education, Massey could read several languages, including not only English but also French, Latin, Greek and evidently Hebrew and Egyptian.
In his studious works on Egypt, in adding to the obtainable Egyptian sources, Gerald Massey utilized various other ancient texts, including Judeo-Christian writings such as the Bible, as well as those of early Church fathers such as Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Hippolytus, Eusebius, Epiphanius and Jerome. Massey also cited non-Christian, Jewish and Gnostic writers such as Herodotus, Philo, Pausanias and Valentinus.
Massey was not only accomplished at interpreting the Egyptian data in a highly intelligent and remarkable manner, but, having been raised a Protestant Christian compelled to commit to memory whole sections of the Bible, he was also quite knowledgeable about the scriptures and was able to see the numerous and important correlations between the Christian and Egyptian religions, both the myths and rituals.
Massey’s A Book of the Beginnings, was first published in 1881 in two volumes and in its Preface, he wrote that the book was the product of 10 years of profuse research, conducted mostly in the British Museum completely dedicated to finding the truth. Massey dedicated the last 36 years of his life to the study of Egyptian History.
In three massive two-volume works, The Book of the Beginnings (1881), The Natural Genesis (1883), and Ancient Egypt (1907), we witness a titanic attempt to disentangle and recapture the authentic story of this Nile Valley kingdom from the neglect and the cover up of facts over the centuries. What Massey realized after years of diligent and dedicated research was that his own understanding of the basic underpinnings of Christianity had to be revised.
According to author and theologian Tom Harpur, Author Gerald Massey discovered nearly two hundred instances of immediate correspondence between the mythical Egyptian material and the allegedly historical Christian writings about Jesus.
In his scholarly works on Egypt, in addition to the available Egyptian sources, Gerald Massey utilized numerous other ancient texts, including Judeo-Christian writings such as the Bible, as well as those of early church fathers such as Justin Martyr, Clement of Alexandria and Jerome. William Cooper a historical scholar in his own right died at the early age of 35, but his valuable work on Egypt and its relationship to the Bible and Christianity were issued years before Gerald Massey published his famous writings on the same subject. So, the claim of association between the Egyptian and Christian religions did not originate with Gerald Massey at all, and a significant number of previous writers on the subject were well respected Christians. In my research, I have found that there are countless numbers of historians and writers who have put forth powerful knowledge that proves without question for me that Kemet was the source material for Christian thought and religious practice.
The race of the ancient Egyptians has been a subject of controversy for centuries. Most people have been brainwashed to believe that the ancient Egyptians who created the world’s first civilization were Europeans. The ancient Egyptians were not Europeans. This is a false representation of the ancient Egyptians. The main motivation of that propaganda has been to make African people believe that they are not capable of developing a civilization; to steal all the achievements of African people; to discredit and degrade Africans; and to perpetuate the myth of the great White race.
According to Herodotus, a Greek scholar who traveled to ancient Egypt, the ancient Egyptians have Black skins and woolly hair. The eyewitness testimony of Herodotus as reported in his work is also supported by the physical features of the ancient Egyptians as they portrayed themselves through art. The European elements that western historians have been proud to publicize to the world account for the immigration of foreigners (Asians and Greeks) and invasion of Egypt by Asians and Greeks, at the time when the glory of ancient Egyptian civilization had ceased to exist for a long period of time.
Africa was the primary foundation of the world’s people, languages, myths, symbols, and religions and Egypt is Africa’s mouthpiece. Egypt brought African genius to its highest and finest expression then proceeded to instruct the world in Africa’s wisdom.
Ancient Egyptian civilization was the greatest civilization of the ancient World. Modern scholars agreed that the ancient Egyptian civilization was the world’s first and longest civilization created by mankind to date. The ancient Egyptians attained an advanced level of development in mathematics, medicine, astronomy, metallurgy, philosophy, religion, arts and architecture. Pyramids, Temples, palaces, obelisks, sphinxes, statues, inscriptions on the structures, documents, and other materials attest to the truth of the magnificence of the ancient Egyptians.
The ancient Egyptians were seen in the ancient world as the forerunners in many fields of human endeavor. They had attained an advanced level in, (let me say it again) mathematics, engineering, arts, astronomy, medicine, literature and religion. Ancient Egypt was the center of learning where intellectuals from all over the world traveled to study mathematics, astronomy, medicine, literature and other subjects. The Greeks, whose civilization developed at least two thousand years after that of Egypt, traveled in large number to Egypt to learn the wisdom of the Egyptians.
Egyptian science, medicine, mathematics and astronomy were all of the next financially higher order of refinement and sophistication than modern scholars are willing to acknowledge. The whole of Egyptian civilization was based upon a precise understanding of universal laws, (many of which you will find in my earlier books). In this profound understanding of the universe and life, it manifested itself in a consistent, coherent and interrelated system that fused science, art and religion into a single organic unity.
Egypt/Kemet in Africa was the first and only nation state of the ancient world. The Sumerians, The Greeks and the Babylonians had all formed city states but not a Nation State. City States grew and flourished but the Egyptians thrived and their culture blossomed for more than three thousand years. They came to be head and shoulders above all other civilizations and left behind a wealth of information about their way of life. The first and greatest civilizations designed by humans were the inventions of the Black man.
The genius and creativity of Black people go back to the dawn of human history. Has anybody ever said you couldn’t be a scientist, engineer, or the author of books? Your ancestors were the first to invent science, engineering, and writing. Blacks were also the first to discover medicine, architecture, astronomy, engineering, agriculture, banking systems, and much more. Instead of being a debtor to humanity, Black people were the foundation, the very spring, from which civilization as we know it today has flowed.
Dr. John Henrik Clarke expressed that that mechanism of propaganda has had an impact on African behaviors. As a result, Africans have developed a crisis of identity, an embodiment of confusion, fear and inferiority complexes. African people have become ashamed of their skin color, the same skin of the Pharaoh. Africans have developed unfavorable images of themselves in relationship to European people. African people have become politically naive in their relationship to foreigners (Europeans). Africans in America have become increasingly indifferent and disrespectful towards each other. While we as a race are changing and growing in positive ways many of the ideas just explained still plague us today.
It is hoped that this information will help to rebuild and reconstruct what Africans have lost as people: identity, courage, confidence, hope, pride, respect and honesty. (John Henry Clark)
To repeat: In his book, The Destruction of Black Civilization, Black scholar, Chancellor Williams informs us that history has proven that a number of tactics were employed by anthropologists to blot out Black accomplishments. Here is a list of Williams’ observations about how anthropologists chose to operate:
1. “Ignore or refuse to publish any facts of African history” that would not support their racial theories.
2. “Create a religious and ‘scientific’ doctrine” to ease the White conscience for oppressing and enslaving African people.
3. “Flood the world with hastily thrown together African ‘histories’” that contain European perspectives only.
4. “Start renaming people and places. Replace African names of persons, places, and things with Arabic and European names.” This will disguise their true Black identity.
5. Change the criteria for defining race. For example, one drop of Negro blood in America makes you a Negro, no matter how light your skin. When reporting ancient history, reverse the standard. Make one drop of White blood render someone a Caucasian no matter how dark the skin.
During the “riding-at-the-back-of the-bus” era of the South during the 1940s in the USA, be assured that any of the Pharaoh’s of Egypt, especially up to and including the 25th Dynasty, would have been required in America to sit at the back of the bus.
6. When Black participation in civilization is so obvious and your best schemes can’t hide it, find a way to attribute the success to outside White influence.
7. When all the ancient historians contradict your theory, seek to discredit them.
Dr. John Henrik Clarke stated that the enslavement of Africans created wealth for Europe, and helped in gaining control of the wealth of the African world. Europeans discovered in the Nile Valley (Egypt, Africa), extensive riches. The art, architecture, inscriptions on structures, and documents found attested of the greatness of a former civilization, thousands of years ago; and the overwhelming presence of African people associated with that culture. They were fascinated and overwhelmed by the magnificence of that civilization. To think that a race of African men and women who were later their slaves and objects of contempt are the ones who created that civilization. Europeans were not and even today many are not able to accept these evident African accomplishments. Due to the harsh and cruel conditions imposed on Africans by Europeans during their kidnapping, shipping and working us without pay, it is estimated that more than 100 million Africans were killed during that sad period of African history.
Europeans began changing the image the origin of Egypt’s African civilization and the race of the people who founded that civilization in order to provide the rationale and justification for the slave trade and its horrific de-humanization of African people. The strategy was to deny ancient Egyptian’s African identity, so that they could deny Africans any abilities to build a civilization. This was done by colonizing the information about the ancient Egyptian history. By colonizing the information about the achievements of Africans in ancient world, they began to project a picture of themselves as the only race that has been responsible for civilization, culture and progress.
With a negative picture of the Africans they hoped to oppress them and convince them that they deserved to be oppressed because they had not contributed to the civilization of humanity, thus the need to be civilized.
People of African descent must become aware of their achievements made to human civilization. This knowledge will help us to determine the course of our lives through the process of liberating ourselves from the chains of traditional falsehood. This knowledge will break down the falsehood about African people and to help destroy the racist assertions of our so-called inherent incapability as African people to build a civilization.
This knowledge will also help the non-African world rediscover the African people in the story of human development throughout the history of the world.
African slavery which began around 1400 AD lasted more than four hundred years. Africans were kidnapped from Africa. Africans were forced to work day and night in plantations and mines without pay. We were flogged, hanged on trees, starved to death, and burned alive, castrated, stripped of our culture, and reduced to a sub-human level. Egypt/Kemet in Africa was the first and only nation state of the ancient world. City States grew and flourished but the Egyptians thrived and their culture and nation blossomed for more than three thousand years. They came to be head and shoulders above all other civilizations and left behind a wealth of information about their way of life.
The Egyptian thinking that the One God can be represented through his functions and attributes has its equivalence in other later religions. Each one of us has various functions and attributes that are godlike. A person can be a teacher in the classroom, a father to his children, a husband to his wife, a player on his team, etc. This person does not have multiple personalities, but multiple functions/attributes.
Egyptians recognized the universal validity of this kind of thinking, and applied it to all the levels of the hierarchically organized world. Even though it may appear complex at first sight, it is both coherent and consistent with experience. This was the essence of the Egyptian philosophy. It is a real philosophy based on organized, systematic, self-consistent and coherent principles. God was indefinable to the Egyptians but the “effects” of His “cause” were seen everywhere. The “Cause” and His “effects” were recognized in various forces seen both in the Heavens, Nature, and within the human species himself. These forces have to be subordinate, since they all came from somewhere. The ultimate thing is God, the One, The Source, The Amen and Ra.
Egyptian symbols were carefully chosen from the natural world, to best express or embody a specific function or principle. A chosen symbol represents that function or principle, on all levels simultaneously, from the simplest, most obvious physical manifestation of that function to the most abstract and metaphysical.
It is important to realize that for Egyptians, every physical fact of life had a symbolic meaning. At the same time, every symbolic act of expression had a material background. So when we begin to examine their representations of God as symbolized in various manifestations like Osiris, Anubis, Isis, etc., we must never fail to realize that these are NOT meant to be literal or separate gods but rather manifestations of the One True God and His Works. This is very similar to the various names of El, Jehovah and Yahweh in the Hebrew varied views of God and His attributes.
That which is known as the Christian religion existed among the African ancients, and never did not exist; from the beginning of the human race until the time when Christ came in the flesh, at which time the true religion, which already existed began to be called Christianity. This view was cited by Dr. Alvin Boyd Kuhn in his Shadow of The Third Century, Elizabeth N.J.: Academy Press, 1949, p.3.
The source of Christianity lay undiscovered within the theologies of ancient Egypt. I will argue here that the principles and precepts of the Osiris theology of Egypt are virtually identical in content and application to the principles and precepts of Christianity as they present themselves in the Jesus saga. Moreover, the Egyptian theology existed as an unbroken historical thread that began and developed within Egypt for almost three thousand years before being spread across the Mediterranean world by the Greeks until it finally came to rest in the Roman empire and, in particular, in the Palestine of Jesus’ day.
So many think the Bible survived because God stood behind His word and therefore the world received the Bible. Nothing could be further from the truth. The Bible has been forced on people for centuries by brute force, rape, torture and murder and over time it was accepted. But make no mistake it was forced on the masses. For example, very early in the formation of Christianity as we know it today, Theodosius declared Christianity to be the official Roman state religion, and all pagan cults were thereafter forbidden. These edicts were devastating to Egyptian culture and religion, both of which had been preserved over the millennia through the Egyptian language and the writing systems of Egyptian priests.
In 391 C.E. the Patriarch of Alexandria, Theophilus, summoned the monks to arms and turned them against the city of Memphis and the great shrine of Serapis. The Serapeum temple had become the main temple of the Osiran-Isis religion. The attack was akin to ordering the destruction of the Vatican. Egyptian priests were massacred in their shrines and in the streets. The ferocity of the violence consumed priests, followers, and the Egyptian intellectual elite of Alexandria, Memphis, and the other cities of Egypt who were murdered and their temples and libraries destroyed. The institutional structure of Egyptian religion, then more than four millennia old, was demolished in less than two decades.
The West is surely not where mankind’s moral conscience first emerged. It was in Egypt, long before there was a West at all, three thousand years before there were any Israelites, and four thousand years before there were any Christians, that evidence for the first stirring of moral conscience is found in Africa.
Steve Biko gives us a true African perspective. It is important for us to know we knew the almighty before Western Biblical influence was introduced to the African thought process. We all accepted without any doubt the existence of a God. We had our own community of saints. We believed-and this was consistent without views of life-that all people who died had a special place next to God. We felt communication with God, could only be through these people. We never knew anything about hell-we do not believe that God can create people only to punish them eternally after a short period on earth. Another aspect of religious practices was the occasion of worship. Again we did not believe that religion could be featured as a separate part of our existence on earth. It was manifest in our daily lives. We thanked God through our ancestors before we drank beer, married, worked etc. We would obviously find it artificial to create special occasions for worship. Neither did we see it logical to have a particular building in which all worship would be conducted. We believed that God was always in communication with us and therefore merited attention everywhere and anywhere.
It was the missionaries who confused our people with their new stories. By some strange logic, they argued that theirs was a scientific religion and ours was mere superstition in spite of the biological discrepancies so obvious in the basis of their religion. They further went on to preach a theology of the existence of Hell, scaring our fathers and mothers with stories about burning in eternal flames and gnashing of teeth and grinding of bone. This cold cruel religion was strange to us but our fore-fathers were sufficiently scared of the unknown impending anger to believe that it was worth a try. Down went our cultural values.
Steve Biko. A student leader, he later founded the Black Consciousness Movement which would empower and mobilize much of the urban Black population. Since his death in police custody, he has been called a martyr of the anti-apartheid movement. While living, his writings and activism attempted to empower Black people, and he was famous for his slogan “Black is beautiful”, which he described as meaning: “man, you are okay as you are; begin to look upon yourself as a human being.”
Prior to the Greek use of the word Egypt Africans referred to their land as Kemet, that is the Black land. Kemet was the strongest term used by the ancients into to indicate Blackness. It meant cold Black. The word Kemet is written in hieroglyphic form and was represented by block of wood, which was charred on the end. In ancient times, there was no physical distinction made between the people who occupied the lands now call it Egypt and Sudan the ancient Egyptians saw themselves as Blacks who are portrayed as no different from other Blacks in Africa.
The second century Christian historian Justin Martyr wrote, whatever things were rightly said among the ancients are now the property of Christians.
The revelatory ideas of heaven, The soul of man going to heaven, The soul of man sitting on a throne by the side of God, The heavenly blessed eating from the tree of Life God molding man from clay, God breathing the breath of life into man’s nostrils, The revelation of creation through the spoken word, The revealing of moral concepts of good and evil, Circumcision, Baptism, The revealing of hell and hell fire and Judgment of the heart or soul are African/Kemetic/Egyptian ideas used over a thousand years before the first ideas of the Old Testament were formed.
Herodotus, the Greek historian of 500 B.C., who became known as the “Father of History,” stated, “Of all the nations of the world, the Egyptians are the happiest, healthiest and most religious.”
Ancient Egypt was the gift of the Nile because her agriculture depended largely on the flooding of the Nile River. Ancient Egyptians sowed the seed in the mud brought down by the river in flood. Ancient Egyptians used cows for plowing, sheep and pigs during sowing, and donkeys for the harvest. Plants such as gourds, beans, lentils, chick peas, cucumbers, onions, and lettuce were common in ancient Egypt. Figs, grapes, sycamore, dates, and pomegranates were also produced. Oil producing fruits such as castor-oil plant and olive trees were grown. Reed, flax, rush, cereals, and flowers were also grown in ancient Egypt. The ancient Egyptians also produced alcoholic beverages. The principal wines of the ancient Egyptians were grape wine, palm wine, date wine, and pomegranate wine.
The ancient Egyptians participated in a variety of physical activities, running, hunting, fowling, fishing, boating, swimming, sailing, rowing, yachting, boxing, stick fencing, chariot racing, dancing, wrestling, acrobatic exercises, ball, and board games. Most of the physical activities were practiced for fun and enjoyment; however, some had religious and political significance. For example, the Heb Sed festival was one of the popular religious festivals, practiced by all the kings of ancient Egypt. The festival was held for each Pharaoh the first time after 30 years of his reign. During the festival, the king was required to prove his physical ability to rule by running a planned course.
Dance was a ritual expression as well as a social activity practiced by children, women and men. Dance was usually accompanied by music, clapping, and singing. It was generally performed to entertain guests at social parties, to celebrate different occasions, to accompany rituals, and to bring joy to the deceased. Besides dancing, children, men, and women participated in acrobatic exercises, and numerous floor exercises (backbend or bridge, back to back exercise, the head stand, and dual exercises). Some of the most difficult acrobatic exercises practiced in ancient Egypt were the forward flip, sideways flip, hand strings, posts climbing, and cartwheel. Four phases are involved in the execution of a flip. First the arms raised preparatory to the run-up, then the turning phase with the help of the arms, then the most difficult part of the exercise, the spring of the back of a bent partner so that the outstretched arms of the leaping acrobat enable him to maintain his balance while standing on his partner’s back, and finally, the continuation of the ecstatic dance after the leap to the ground.
Hunting, fishing, fowling, trapping, and boating were practiced by the ancient Egyptians through pre-dynastic and dynastic periods as a means of acquiring food for many people. With the development of ancient Egyptian society in many fields of humankind or the prosperity of ancient Egypt, hunting, fishing, fowling, trapping, boating, and other activities were practiced mainly by Pharaohs, high officials and noblemen as a means of diversion and enjoyment.
Most people in ancient Egypt practiced hunting for food, shelter and clothing. Hunting of wild animals such as lions, crocodiles, wild bulls, rhinoceros, elephant, and hippopotamus was the favorite recreational time for Pharaohs, high officials, noblemen, and the wealthy. The slaying of dangerous animals in the times of the Pharaohs also had a political significance. It was a testimony of the Pharaohs to fulfill their role as protectors of the group under their care.
Music played a significant role in ancient Egypt. The ancient Egyptians employed music to increase the solemnity of their religious worship, to enhance the pleasures of their social entertainment, to inspire and encourage their warriors, to heighten the rhythmical effects of their dances, and to delight the people in their public festivities, celebrations and processions. Music was also performed during agricultural activities (plowing time, harvest time, and filling of granary with grains), fishing activities and other activities that require the use of rhythm to help perform the duties. The musical activities performed at these occasions were singing songs, playing flute, clapping, and beating sticks. Our knowledge of the ancient Egyptian music comes from a large variety of sources. These include pictorial representations, inscriptions on papyri and walls of tombs and temples, and original musical instruments uncovered from the tombs.
Most representations in regard to music were found in the tombs of private individuals, officials of the king, servants of the gods, and workmen. The ancient Egyptian musical instruments were:
Various types of harps, lyres, the tamboura, a kind of lute or guitar, the single pipe, the double pipe, the flute, two kinds of trumpets, three types of tambourine, three types of drums, the sistrum, the crotala, cymbals and bells.
According to musical historians, the ancient Greeks derived their musical system from the ancient Egyptians. Many Greek scholars are said to have studied music in ancient Egypt. Many of their musical instruments are stated to have been originally derived from ancient Egypt, and ancient nations of Asia.
The Great Pyramid is Built
on Solid Rock
The cubit of measurement is the Hebrew cubit of 25.025 inches. The length of each side of the base is 365.367 cubits, the exact number of days in the solar year, including the extra day every 4 years, and also allowing for the periodical dropping of a leap year at intervals.
The angle of the slope of the sides is as 10 to 9. That is, for every 10 feet you ascend up the slope of the Pyramid you rise in altitude 9 feet, and if you multiply the altitude of the Pyramid by 10 raised to the 9th power, you have 91, 840, 000, which in miles, gives the exact distance of the sun from the earth.
The Pharaoh gave the people a common goal, to build these pyramids which forged their national identity of cooperation
The slope of the sides of the Pyramid is of such an angle that they meet at the apex at the predetermined height of 232.52 cubits. Why this fraction of a cubit? So that if twice the length of a side at the base, be divided by the height of the Pyramid, we shall have the figures 3.14159, (365.242X 2 232. 52=3.14159), which, when multiplied by the diameter of a circle, gives its circumference. Now the perimeter of the base of the Pyramid (365.242X 4=14609.68) is exactly equal to the circumference of a circle whose diameter is twice the height of the Pyramid (232.52X 2X 3.1416=14609. 68). So we see in the equality of these figures the solution of the mathematical problem of how to square the circle.
There is a twofold year, the “Sidereal,” or year of the stars, and the “Equinoctial,” or year of the seasons. They differ by about 50 seconds each year. That is, the stars in their rising and setting are retarded about 50 seconds a year, so that for the “Sidereal” and “Equinoctial” years to come around and again coincide, will take 25, 827 years, which is known as a “Cycle,” and when we add together the diagonals of the Pyramid’s base, in Pyramid inches, we have 25, 827 inches, or as many inches as the Cycle has years.
Mathematics of Khufu’s Pyramid consists of a line drawn from North to South which is a mere three minutes and six seconds deviant from the celestial meridian which means that the Pyramid was built to face true north. In other words, if we consider a circle with a radius of the Pyramid’s height, they will be identical. This speaks to the genius of the ancient Africans in the B.C. era.
If we multiply the length of the side of the Pyramid by 2 and divide the result by the height, the answer will be 230. 364 multiplied by 2 and divided by 146.599 equals 3.14 which is the modern day Pi, that is, the ratio of the circle’s circumference to its diameter contained in the Pyramid.
In addition, the Ancient Egyptians made many other contributions. They pioneered the 3, 4, 5 triangle which is the basis of the so-called ‘Pythagorean Theorem.’ They used this triangle to accurately calculate right angles. That the Egyptians knew this triangle, the following excerpt by Plutarch, the great Greco-Roman scholar, is most edifying: ‘The Egyptians appeared to have figured out the world in the form of the most beautiful of triangles. The Golden Section or phi Φ (an irrational number approximately 1.618) was built into the dimensions of the Great Pyramid of Giza.
The precession of the equinoxes can be explained as the very slow, cyclic changes in the coordinates of the fixed stars that takes place over a time period of 25,900 years. This massive period of time is called a Great Year (of 25,900 years) and can be divided into smaller units called an Age or a Great Month (of 2,160 years). Twelve Great Months is equal to one Great Year (i.e. 2160 x 12 = 25,900). For this to be observed and used as a measurement of time requires a very ancient people with an extensive history.
Sir Norman Lockyer, the great English astronomer, proved that the Ancient Egyptians knew this by showing that the Egyptians re orientated their temples to keep them in line with shifting stellar phenomena over the period of a thousands of years.
This degree of accuracy proves that the ancient Africans were well aware of the spherical nature of the earth. They possessed this advanced knowledge of mathematics. They had already calculated the radius and circumference of the earth. Alignment of Giza Pyramids The alignment or constellation of the Orion (Osirian) Belt occurred in 1050 B.C. above the Giza plateau in ancient Kemet (Egypt). The alignment of the three pyramids at the Giza plateau on earth is a perfect spiritual and terrestrial re-enactment of the map of Orion’s Belt as it occurred in the sky above in 1050 B.C. as corroborated by engineer Robert Bovell during TLC’s Cable TV Channel program entitled “Secrets of the Pyramids and the Sphinx.”
In the Belt of Orion, (Osiris) three stars run in a row but the top star (the smallest one) is slightly offset to the left. At the Giza plateau, two of the pyramids are of almost identical size and set along a diagonal line but the third pyramid is not only much smaller but also is also off-set to the left of this diagonal line just as the alignment of the three stars in Orion’s Belt. This is sacred ground. As such, these ancient Africans incorporated the physical and spiritual aspects in their monuments.
Now this is really important for us to understand the power of our story. From the Old Testament, Amos was a prophet from 793 BC to 753 BC, during the reign of Uzziah, King of Judah. Most scholars believe that Amos gave his message in the following scripture, in the autumn of 750 BC or 749 BC.
Amos 5:8 Seek him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night: that calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The LORD is his name:
Yet before that scripture shows up in the book of Amos, that knowledge shows up 1,721 years before that in the Cairo Museum on the capstone of King Amenemhet III you will find a pictorial view, carved into the capstone, Asur standing with stars in his hand. This is part of the symbolic message of the seven stars, three of which are in Orion’s belt and the three main pyramids are made to follow the pattern in the heavens. So, in fact, we already knew about “Our Father which art in heaven,” and as above so below, before it was written later.
Finally, it is important to note that the building of the Pyramids was a form of national service and not slave labor as shown in the movie the Ten Commandments. Let me say that again: They were not built by slaves, aliens from out of space or “Tanned Europeans.” Africans/Kemites/Egyptians built the Pyramids. The builders were buried near their work and the stress of their bone structures scientifically attest to this fact. The stark, historical reality is that these Africans never called their original stone monuments, Pyramids. The ancient Africans—Kemites called their colossal stone monuments “Ben Ben,” which means “House of extension into light.”
When one studies Black history, it is easy to see why Western Academicians go to such great lengths to suppress, distort and appropriate it for their own purposes or ignore it. The global presence of Black people, their magnificent monuments, vast empires, infinite creativity and giant personalities are overwhelming. When the truth is revealed, many people simply cannot accept it. It is difficult to convince some people, who are programmed to accept the past and present “inferiority” of the Black race, to open up and objectively examine the historical record for them.
Yet Black African Kemetic people developed a very sophisticated philosophy of behavior through Maát: The symbolic representation of Maát as a human figure with outreached hands and wings is the Netcher of the weighing of the soul in ancient Egyptian. The heart of the deceased was believed to be the seat of the soul and it was weighed on the scale of the Netcher Maát, against a feather, which represented the principles of truth and righteousness (the seven cardinal virtues). This symbolic weighing of the heart against the feather of truth (Maát) was performed to establish the righteousness of the deceased. The scale of Maát was balanced after the recitation of the “42” Declarations of Innocence or Admonitions of Maát.
The Neophyte or students ultimate aim in Kemet was for a person to become “One with God” or to “become like God.” The path to the development of godlike qualities was through the development of virtue, but virtue could only be achieved through special study and effort. According to George G. M. James in his timeless work Stolen Legacy writes: The following of the 10 virtues were sought by the Neophyte in ancient Kemet. In the final analysis, the ancient Kemites sought Maát or to be more correct they sought to become one with Maát, the cosmic order Control of thoughts
Control of actions, devotion of purpose, have faith in the ability of your teacher to teach you the truth, have faith in yourself to assimilate the truth, have faith in themselves, (as students) to wield the truth, be free from resentment under the experience of persecution, be free from resentment under the experience of wrong, cultivate the ability to distinguish between right and wrong and to cultivate the ability to distinguish between the real and the unreal. This kind of thinking and the development of these ideas is seldom cultivated in societies today.
The Temple in Man
Throughout recorded history, scholars, philosophers, artists, and architects have paid homage to and in many cases practiced the ancient sacred science, or however much of it they still could access. Neo-Platonists, Gnostics, Rosicrucian’s, Masons, alchemists, astrologers, magicians, and kabbalists all claimed their knowledge descended from very ancient times, and most believed that Egypt was its source. Kepler, for example, exulted when he discovered the orbital paths of the planets, asserting that he had rediscovered the knowledge of the Egyptians.
Schwaller’s work concerned mainly the New Kingdom temple of Luxor, which he called “the Temple of Man.” In its measurements, geometry, harmonies, and proportions, he discovered the elements of a profound spiritual cosmology in which art, religion, philosophy, and science were fused into a single comprehensive doctrine-the sacred science of the ancient world.
All those animal-headed gods were not figments of the primitive imagination or a carryover from a still more primitive type of animistic religions, as was commonly believed, but rather they were embodiments of cosmic principles. The ideas through which universal consciousness manifested into the manifest, material universe was apparent in the construction by perfection and geometric shapes. It is precisely the recognition of such principles that is lacking in our own technologically brilliant, but philosophically naive and spiritually empty secular science.
Fertilization, gestation, birth, growth, maturity, old age, death, rebirth, and resurrection are the principles of the organic world. Polarity, relationship, substantiality, potentiality, time-and-space, and process are among the principles of the cosmological world. These expressions, given appropriate names and forms were the “gods” of Egypt. Each one, Amen, Ra, Horus, Osiris ect., was associated with its own symbolism, which in turn commanded the geometry of the temples erected to commemorate that “god” and to evoke in the eye and heart and intellect of the beholder communion with that principle or set of principles which could be felt.
The scientific knowledge and measurements of the temple as previously shown are beyond reproach; Egyptologists acknowledge this. The geometry that flows from the measurements of the temples, and the esoteric interpretation in all its manifold aspects (mathematics, astronomy, astrology, symbolism, cosmology, mythology, art, architecture, and even medicine) flows from the geometry as a visual expression of the majesty of God.
Ancient Egypt was regarded by the classical civilizations of Greece and Rome as the source of all wisdom. It was and still is. Proper study of Egypt/Kemet will help you come to understand why that wisdom has been opposed so virulently by the priesthood of those who seek to keep you in bondage to their rein in religion. You may begin to appreciate the manner in which civilized Africans in Kemet once presented themselves to the world. You will have the opportunity also to learn why Egypt/Kemet, even in ruins, remains a magnet for travelers and why its temples, tombs, and pyramids still rightly provoke our awe and wonder in the hearts and spirit of men and women from around the world.
There are two parts of the ancient temple of Luxor; the outer temple where the beginning initiates are allowed to come, and the inner temple where one can enter only after proven worthy and ready to acquire the higher knowledge and insights. One of the proverbs in the Outer Temple is “The body is the house of God.” That is why it is said, “Man know thyself.” In the Inner Temple, one of the many proverbs is “Man, know thyself… and thou shalt know the gods.” From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
So you see the concepts found in the Bible are not new, they are ancient and like much of what is in the Bible in terms of spiritual, scientific and mental concepts come from Kemet, land of the Blacks.
There can be no clear understanding of the major religions of the world unless one has a functioning knowledge and an unprejudiced appreciation of the way the ancient pre-Christian beliefs saw the spiritual world. Europeans not only colonized people but also colonized people’s understanding of history. Nowhere is that more apparent than in religion.
There are very, very few historians today who would honestly admit that highly intelligent human societies are older than 7000 years old. But the African invention of the 365¼ day calendar is one example that makes a mockery of the traditional views of Eurocentric academia. It may come as a surprise to many of us that our calendar, with a few Roman alterations, is actually of Egyptian origin. This is because unfortunately, the African contribution to such scientific achievements is still ignored and many textbooks still hang on to the misconception that the calendar was invented by Sumerians. The Sumerians referred to themselves as “black heads”. The fact is that much of classical Africa’s civilizations were already quite old before Sumerian or Europe had even entered into history.
To begin to even appreciate the genius of our ancestors, we have no choice but honestly admit that what we think we know about the ancient world is actually very little and much of that has been tainted by intellectual dishonesty, imperialistic designs, religious privilege of the priest craft and outright racial bigotry. If you cannot see this or acknowledge this then you will not search for “truth,” especially if you “believe,” that you already have the “truth.”
Most of us have been indoctrinated in the belief that Christianity and for that matter Judaism dropped onto mankind in the midst of an extremely sinful world. That simply is not the truth. The historical reality is much more complicated than that. What we believe to be some new revolutionary dispensation beginning with Adam and being finalized with Jesus actually goes back to the ancient beliefs and writings of antiquity found in Kemet, land of the Blacks.
In the development and construction of a new religious system the creators attack and demonize the faiths that came before it even if these faiths were directly responsible for its very existence through copying their old ideas. Often the new faith is presented in such a way as to appear that it was created in isolation and/or represents the highest dispensation born in the midst of a world steeped in wickedness. The old faith is painted with a brush of evil and godlessness. Judaism, progeny of Kemet/Egypt and Babylon, branded its parents as demonic and oppressive. Unless you do independent studies as a common preacher or individual, you may never know this, you will just continue to “believe.” Christianity likewise, drew from ancestral Judaism and Kemet only what it wanted, rejected the rest and then burned its ancestral bridges, destroyed documents in Alexandria Africa where the books of the Bible were put together and finally destroying any other religion by brute force backed up by the Roman government and military might. The capital of Christendom up until the time of Constantine was Alexandria. However, Gerald Massey traced Christianity’s origins back some 10,000 years into inner Africa.
Egyptians and Ethiopians were the first people to convert to Christianity because they saw in it no difference to what they were worshipping all along. The early Church found in Egypt a safe haven after being persecuted. The early desert fathers like Anthony the Hermit and countless others, were the first to mould Christianity into shape. In fact, the Church’s earliest saints, bishops and martyrs were African.
Every school boy believes that when he hears or reads the names of the four cardinal virtues, he is hearing or reading names of virtues determined by Plato. Nothing has been more misleading, for the Egyptian Mystery System contained ten virtues, and from this source Plato copied what have been called the four cardinal virtues, justice, wisdom, temperance, and courage. It is indeed surprising how, for centuries, the Greeks have been praised by the Western World for intellectual accomplishments which belong without a doubt to the Egyptians or the peoples of North Africa.
Egyptian Medical Treatments
Ancient Egyptian physicians took advantage of their available natural resources to help treat many common ailments and conditions.
The Ancient Egyptians were quite advanced in their diagnoses and treatments of various illnesses. Their advancements in ancient medical techniques were quite extraordinary, considering the lack of “modern” facilities, sterilization, sanitation, and researching capabilities. The remedies used by Ancient Egyptian physicians came mostly from nature, and many are still considered viable homeopathic treatments for certain ailments today.
Along with their strong faith in their gods, the Ancient Egyptians used their knowledge of the human anatomy and the natural world around them to treat a number of ailments and disorders effectively. Their knowledge and research is impressive still today, and their work paved the way for the study of modern medicine.
Thanks to the Egyptians’ diligent record keeping, scholars have been able to translate information from the Edwin Smith Papyrus, the Kahun Papyrus, and the Ebers Papyrus to learn the extent of the Egyptian’s knowledge of anatomy, disease, hygiene, disease, and healing which is extensive. Treatments for several ailments were outlined in these documents, utilizing resources available to them, including minerals, plant materials, and animal products. The papyri also explain how these treatments were administered, and they were dispensed in a number of ways, including orally, topically, and through suppositories and enemas.
Disease was rather common in Ancient Egypt. There were many skin afflictions, such as parasites, that occurred as a result of contact with the Nile waters. Worms and tuberculosis were also common, and were transmitted from their cattle. And pneumonia was a fairly common occurrence, resulting from taking excessive amounts of sand into the lungs.
Imhotep was called “God of Medicine,” “Prince of Peace,” and a “Type of Christ.” Imhotep was revered as a healer from approximately 2850 B.C. to 525 B.C. Even kings and queens revered him. Imhotep lived during the Third Dynasty at the court of King Djoser. Imhotep was a known scribe, chief lector; priest, architect, astronomer and magician, in Kemet medicine and magic were used together. For 3000 years he was worshipped as a god in Greece and Rome. Early Christians worshipped him as the “Prince of Peace.”
Imhotep was also a poet and philosopher. He urged contentment and preached cheerfulness. His proverbs contained a “philosophy of life.” Imhotep coined the saying “Eat, drink and be merry for tomorrow we shall die.”
When the Egyptians crossed the Mediterranean, becoming the foundation of the Greek culture, Imhotep teachings were absorbed there. Yet, as the Greeks were determined to assert that they were the originators of everything, Imhotep was forgotten for thousands of years and a legendary figure, Hippocrates, who came 2000 years after him became known as the Father of Medicine.
Sir William Osler says that it is Imhotep, was the real Father of Medicine. He said, “The first figure of a physician to stand out clearly from the mists of antiquity.” Imhotep diagnosed and treated over 200 diseases, 15 diseases of the abdomen, 11 of the bladder, 10 of the rectum, 29 of the eyes, and 18 of the skin, hair, nails and tongue. Imhotep treated tuberculosis, gallstones, appendicitis, gout and arthritis. He also performed surgery and practiced some dentistry. Imhotep extracted medicine from plants. He also knew the position and function of the vital organs and circulation of the blood system.
In the Old Kingdom Period (i.e. Dynasty One to Six), the doctors were specialists—eyes, head, teeth, intestines, etcetera. There was even a separate guild of bone setters who treated fractures and dislocations and pioneered the very same techniques that Hippocrates, the Ancient Greek scholar, would popularize thousands of years later. The Egyptian medical doctors were employed by the state. One Old Kingdom position was ‘Chief of Dentists and Physicians.’ Another position was ‘Director of the Women Doctors.’ Incidentally, nearly 120 physicians appear in the Egyptian annals. Typically, they were trained in an institution called the ‘per ankh.’ At once, this served as the school, library, clinic, temple and seminary.
Much of the teaching and training was taught orally as was done elsewhere in Africa. Described in both the Edwin Smith and the Ebers Papyri, the Ancient Egyptian doctors pioneered the use of the diagnostic method. Thus, the patient describes the complaint to the doctor. The doctor then assessed the patient checking over the face, the eyes, nasal secretions, perspiration, and testing for stiffness of limbs or the abdomen. The doctor would ask for a urine sample and a feces sample. They took the patients pulse. We know that the Egyptians invented the hour but they must also have invented smaller units of time.
Roughly 2000 years of recorded history and African cultural achievements precede the beginnings of Israelite and Judean history. This earlier span of time witnessed major literary, technological, and scientific developments, together the and each of known as Kemet the land of the Blacks known written materials from this civilization include business documents, royal inscriptions, biographical artful narratives, epic poems, correspondence, love songs, wisdom collections, theological and mythological sagas, hymns and prayers, even recipes, both pharmacological and culinary. Technological and scientific achievements can be seen in the development of fortified cities. Egypt was the dominant empire in the Middle East, with its control and influence extending deep into the Asiatic territory. Palestine in particular, the homeland of Israel and Judah, was essentially an Egyptian territory. The proximity of Egypt and Egyptian influence both political and cultural was a constant feature throughout Israelite and Judean history.
The Encyclopedia Britannica says, “The evidence afforded by Egyptian and Greek texts support the view that the reputation of Imhotep was really very well respected in early times. His prestige increased with the lapse of centuries and his temples in Greek times were the centers of medical teachings.”
Egyptian physicians conducted rudimentary surgeries as well as carry out rituals and prayers for healing, the Egyptians were able to treat many less serious conditions through the use of natural remedies. Many of the remedies are familiar, as they are used today as homeopathic remedies. They included: Pain relief—thyme, Diuretics and laxatives—Dill, balsam apple, onions, parsley, Asthma—sesame, honey and milk, frankincense, Digestive aids—garlic, sandalwood, juniper, mint, Breath freshener—mint, caraway, Chest pains—juniper, mustard seeds, aloe, Headaches—aloe, poppy seeds, Wound dressing—honey, a natural antibiotic, Anesthetic—poppy seeds (also used for insomnia), Burns and skin diseases—aloe, Epilepsy—camphor, Vomiting—mustard seeds to induce it, mint to stop it.
A commoner by birth, Imhotep’s intelligence and determination enabled him to rise through the ranks to become one of Djoser’s most trusted advisors, as well as the architect of the Pharaoh’s tomb, the Step Pyramid. However, Imhotep’s best known writings were medical text. As a physician, Imhotep is believed to have been the author of the Edwin Smith Papyrus in which more than 90 anatomical terms and 48 injuries are described. It is said he also founded a school of medicine in Memphis, a part of his center possibly known as Asklepion, which remained famous for two thousand years. A commoner by birth, Imhotep’s intelligence and determination enabled him to rise through the ranks to become one of Djoser’s most trusted advisors.
All of this occurred some 2,200 years before the Western Father of Medicine Hippocrates was born. Sir William Osler tells us that Imhotep was the: “First figure of a physician to stand out clearly from the mists of antiquity.” Sir William Osler (1849-1919) best-known physician in the English-speaking world at the turn of the century, also called Imhotep the “most influential physician in history”
Imhotep diagnosed and treated over 200 diseases, 15 diseases of the abdomen, 11 of the bladder, 10 of the rectum, 29 of the eyes, and 18 of the skin, hair, nails and tongue. Imhotep treated tuberculosis, gallstones, appendicitis, gout and arthritis. He also performed surgery and practiced some dentistry. Imhotep extracted medicine from plants. He also knew the position and function of the vital organs and circulation of the blood system. He is often recognized as the world’s first doctor, a priest, scribe, sage, poet, astrologer, and a vizier and chief minister, though this role is unclear, to Djoser (reigned 2630-2611 BC), the second king of Egypt’s third dynasty. He may have lived under as many as four kings. An inscription on one of that kings statues gives us Imhotep’s titles as the “chancellor of the king of lower Egypt”, the “first one under the king”, the “administrator of the great mansion”, the “hereditary Noble”, the “high priest of Heliopolis”, the “chief sculptor”, and finally the “chief carpenter”.
His prestige increased with the passing of centuries and his temples in Greek times were the centers of medical teachings.” Along with medicine, he was also a patron of architects, knowledge and scribes. James Henry Breasted says of Imhotep: “In priestly wisdom, in magic, in the formulation of wise proverbs; in medicine and architecture; this remarkable figure of Djoser’s reign left so notable a reputation that his name was never forgotten. He was the patron spirit of the later scribes, to whom they regularly poured out a libation from the water-jug of their writing outfit before beginning their work. As a builder, Imhotep is the first master architects who we know by name. He is credited as the first pyramid architect, who built Djoser’s Step Pyramid complex at Saqqara.
The Step Pyramid remains today one of the most brilliant architecture wonders of the ancient world and is recognized as the first monumental stone structure.
He was honored by the Romans and the emperors Claudius and Tiberius had inscriptions praising Imhotep placed on the walls of their Egyptian temples. He even managed to find a place in Arab traditions, especially at Saqqara where his tomb is thought to be located. Imhotep lived to a great age.
Egypt’s moral teaching presented in its Wisdom literature and Mortuary texts attain to the highest levels of sacred awareness. Egypt’s temples, statues, frescoes, carvings, jewelry, painted scrolls and sarcophagi stand as mute witnesses to a brilliant and lofty spiritual culture that has never been equaled on earth. The silent and stationary images of The Egyptian Book of the Dead originally called The Book of Coming Forth by day into the light continues to speak and move today, some four millennia after their creation. Without a doubt, possession of secret knowledge, along with a highly developed moral character, were necessary to penetrate the deeper levels of Egyptian spirituality.
Egyptian religion is the source of the Judean-Christian belief in the after death resurrection promised to mankind as a reward for righteous living. The Egyptian religion was a magical religion that involved a continuous interaction between the individual and the various deities who constituted its elaborate and exalted pantheon. Initiates were required to memorize magical formulas and spells, and to demonstrate their proficiency therein; tests of courage and honor were administered by the officers of the Temple.
Egyptian spiritual and scientific knowledge along with the Egyptian ideas about the trinity was so powerful they become marvels of simultaneous scientific and philosophical completeness and conciseness. The more they are studied, the richer they become. The ‘inner dimension’ of the teachings embedded into each story are capable of revealing several layers of knowledge, according to the stage of development of the listener. The “secrets” are revealed as one evolves higher in spiritual contact and knowledge. The higher we get in spiritual knowledge, according to the ancient Kemetic teachings, the more we see the truth behind words and symbols. It is always there.
The Egyptians did not believe their allegories and stories to be historical facts. They believed IN them, in the sense that they believed in the truth behind the stories. The Ancient Egyptians had numerous allegories, such as the Ausar/Auset/Heru (Osiris/Isis/Horus) allegory. Once a reference was made to his functions and or attributes, he became a distinguishable agent, reflecting this particular function or attribute, and its influence on the world. His various functions and attributes as the Creator, Healer, and the like, were called the neteru (singular: neter in the masculine form and Neteru in the feminine form). As such, an Egyptian Neter/Neteru was not a god or goddess but the representation of a function and an attribute of the One God.
The Neteru, who were called ‘gods’ by some historians, were endorsed and incorporated into Christianity under a new name called, angels. Here are some examples of Ancient Egyptian depiction of Neteru or angels Amen/Amun/Amon; they represent the hidden or occult force underlying creation. Amen represents the spirit that animates the universe with all its constituents. Amen is the hidden one, the Blackness of the Universe. In the three religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam whenever the faithful pray, regardless of language, they always end their prayer by saying Amen. Again, the name, Amen, means the Hidden One—the invisible God of the Ancient Egyptians. Ra (Re) represents the primeval, cosmic, creative force. His hidden name is Amen, which means secret. All neteru (gods) who took part in the creation process are aspects of Ra. Therefore, Ra is often linked with other Neteru, such as Atum-Ra, Ra-Harakhte, etc. Tehuti or Thoth, Hermes, Mercury they represent the Divine aspects of wisdom and intellect. It was Tehuti or Thoth who uttered the words that created the world, as commanded by Ra. He is represented as the messenger of the Neteru or gods and goddesses, of writing, language, and knowledge. Ausar or Osiris represents the principle that makes life come from apparent death. As such, Ausar symbolizes the power of renewal. Ausar represents the process, growth, and the underlying cyclical aspects of the universe. The Ancient Egyptians utilized pictorial symbols to represent the divine attributes and actions. As the saying goes, a picture is worth a thousand words.
In Egyptian symbolism, the precise role of the Neteru or (gods/goddesses), are revealed in many ways: by dress, headdress, crown, feather, animal, plant, color, position, size, gesture, sacred object (e.g., flail, scepter, staff, and ankh), etc. A chosen symbol represents that function or principle, on all levels simultaneously, from the simplest, most obvious physical manifestation of that function to the most abstract and metaphysical. This symbolic language represents a wealth of physical, physiological, psychological and spiritual data in the presented symbols.
Man comes into the world with the higher divine faculties, which are the essence of his or her salvation, in a non-awakened state. The way of the Egyptian religion is, therefore, a system of practices aimed at awakening the dormant higher potential of and in us all.
Ancient Egypt had already created the Sphinx, the Temple complexes and the Great Pyramids, the rest of the world was just beginning to learn how to practice farming and to use sleds, boats and other elementary instruments which were just being invented there. The new findings related to the Sphinx, which are supported by many ancient writings, are leading us to realize the true depths of human origins and the starting point for civilization.
The inability of leaders in the church, synagogue or secular society to accept the truth about the origins of humanity comes from their fear of losing control over their followers. Now that modern science is showing that all human beings originated from the same source, in Africa, and that racial distinctions are at least questionable and misleading, it means that those who have perpetrated and sustained racism can no longer use science or biblical teachings to support their evil and ignorant designs.
In ancient Egypt, the entire society was well acquainted with the philosophy of righteous action. It was known as Maát. Maát was seen as the support upon which the society functioned and prospered.
The origins of Greek mythology and philosophy can be found in Ancient Egypt. This fact was recorded by several Greek Historians of the ancient world. Solon, Thales, Plato, Eudoxus and Pythagoras went to Egypt and consorted with the priests. Eudoxus they say received instruction from Chonuphis of Memphis.
Books of the Old Testament are said to have been written by Moses, however linguistic evidences indicate that they were actually written by Jewish scribes between the years 1000 B.C.E. and 100 B.C.E.
The fundamentalist attitude that the whole Bible must be true leads to the opinion that there can be no factual errors and no contradictions in the Bible. Most say when questions arise in a conversation say, “I believe the Bible,” meaning they believe what the masses of people believe, that God wrote the Bible and it is therefore, without error; end of discussion. Those who hold this opinion pay no attention to or resist the suggestion that the biblical flood story contains contradictions or errors. This is all done without any investigation of Biblical and textual examination. Needless to say, they do not like the idea of two flood stories that are interwoven in Genesis, constructive literature was widespread in the ancient world and is a major contribution in modern biblical scholarship as well and it is accepted that much of both the Old Testament and the New Testament the writings are composites. For example the presence of several sources for the creation story in the Bible was first observed according to JB Witter in 1711 that recognized the importance of the different competing terms used for God. Slowly but surely biblical scholars discovered more and more evidence of earlier sources and later editing in the Pentateuch.
The famous new hypothesis developed over time by scholars assign letters to the four main sources the JEP and P. These two sources for the flood story are the JN. Although the hypothesis has been revised and refined it is based on fundamentally sound, fundamentalist Jews and Christians attack it because it upsets the traditional view that Moses wrote the Pentateuch. The evidence for written sources is quite decisive. The contradictions, duplications and linguistic inconsistencies cannot be sensibly explained in any other way other than the fact it is the composition of several writers not one writer.
Also, as one studies increase he can be on the look-out for Biblical stories that closely parallel these earlier myths and legends from neighboring cultures like Egypt and Babylon. Truly there is “nothing new under the Sun” If you come to understand Egyptian religion and religious ideas you can trace them along with their “reinterpretations” down through history; even into our Christianity today. The gospels recount how Jesus was born and his family persecuted. They had to flee into Egypt for safety. Why would God send him there?
Europeans were by no means the pioneers of human civilization. Half of recorded history had passed long before anyone in Europe could read or write. The priests of Egypt began to keep written records between 4000 and 3000 BC. Shortly after 3000 BC., while the Pharaohs were building the first pyramids, Europeans were creating nothing more distinguished than huge garbage heaps.
Two thousand five hundred years before Socrates was born the inhabitants of ancient Egypt had evolved systems of writing and the distinctive styles of artwork and life which generated ancient civilization. It must be strongly emphasized that the Greeks never said that they were the students of the Babylonians or of the Chaldeans; their most reputable scholars will always boast about having been the pupils of the Egyptians. The director of the Institute of history of medicine Charles University in the Egyptian sacred scholarship was deeply admired by the learned men of Greece, who looked upon Egypt as the cradle of science. The Egyptians and their knowledge as Masters of theology, geography, astronomy, geometry, herbal medicine, the diagnosis and treatment of diseases was to be envied. Thus we find many Greeks pursuing astronomy and geometry in Egypt. Plato lived among Egyptian priests for 13 years reading geometry and the algebra. Here are some interesting facts about Pythagoras; he stayed in Egypt and from his biographer we understand, he was in no hurry to return home and he is said to have been extended his stay to a full 22 years. Plato lived among Egyptian Priests for 13 years reading Geometry and theology. Euclid learned mathematics in Egypt before applying them elsewhere. Who could really be surprised seeing that the pyramids and temples of the Nile were not built by guesswork or rule of thumb, they were built by the use of mathematical propositions which the Egyptians had discovered and proven.
From Egypt we have the earliest medical books, the first observations in anatomy, human and comparative, the first experiments in surgery and pharmacology, the first use of splints, bandages, compresses, and other appliances, and the first anatomical and medical vocabulary, and that an extensive one, the Egyptians, by the same custom of mummification, had the greatest of all influences on history of medicine. From The legacy of Egypt. Oxford University press, London, 1942, page 196
The basic difference between Judaism and Christianity can be summed up in two words: exclusion and expansion. The initial purpose of the Christian religion, according to its Roman constructors, was to globally expand Europeans supremacy in the form of the Roman Empire. This could not be done with Judaism because Judaism is too exclusive, which means there’s no room for expansion. The Jews who had fraudulently claimed to be God’s chosen people who really meant that they were the special ones and nobody else could be them. The Jews doctrine of Judaism did not look to convert or proselytize people, for they are the chosen ones and that’s the bottom line.
How could Rome conquer the world under such an exclusive doctrine? The bottom line is they couldn’t. That’s where Christianity comes in. So the Europeans along with Rome and England come into our community Africa for the sole purpose of stealing our land and mineral resources, and justifying their evil intended actions by saying emphatically that our God is your God and he loves you and wants to help you, join us. All the time the deceitful European is on a global mission of exploiting, criminalizing, raping, mutilating, castrating, and murdering all in the name of Christianity.
Do not mistake the present condition of African people as proof of Black inferiority. What is happening on the African continent; widespread starvation, tribal warfare, political chaos, AIDS, or crushing international debt—is the by-product of European imperialism and White domination.
With the attachment of the word pagan or infidel to the Africans character for not pledging a commitment to Christianity, the Africans character was automatically labeled uncivilized, and therefore expected to be inferior and socially subordinate to the spiritually privileged White man. Europeans simply take the evil essence of their own nature and attach it to the character of the other people, in this case the African. On the flip side they take the godly essence of the Africans character and portray it fraudulently.
Let’s take the word pagan for example the dictionary definition is a person who is not a Christian Muslim or Jew this word was really formulated for the sole metal purpose of degrading the character of the African and other non-Europeans. In order to promote and recruit Africans to Christianity, the European needed to define the character, tradition and Africans original concept of spirituality. Europeans had to prove his way was right and the African way was wrong.
Through their own writings, sermons and drawings of Africans, we were misclassified and portrayed as heathens sub humans, slaves, and laborers. The Europeans sold this derogatory image of Africans, Blacks, Brown and the Red man. Then the White man attaches the word pagan to this derogatory characterization. It was this derogatory label that the European pointed to when associating paganism with the African. The derogatory term becomes the primary psychic factor when the observation includes the African. When you thought about the word pagan your consciousness retrieved the derogatory internalization, pictures and connects that internalization with the perception of the African. So now the word pagan no longer means just non-Christian it now means even, barbaric and criminal, the other, the Black.
The first definition of heathen is anyone who was not a Christian Jew or Moslem. The second definition is one who was regarded as a religious, uncivilized or unenlightened. The proposition is that if you’re not a Christian, and you are an African, regardless of what concept of spirituality you pledge yourself to, the second definition of heathen will always be attached to your character.
One book I read in my personal research used citations from more than 900 books journals and assorted other sources from experts in the fields of study from different time periods beginning in antiquity up to the most modern Egyptologists in order to create a masterful, historical, presentation of the truth based on facts since the topic of Egypt’s history is so contentious. The Egyptian religion was exceedingly well-known and possessed in antiquity without equal in the known world at that time. As the Greek historian Herodotus wrote in his histories almost 2500 years ago, “The Egyptians were religious to the excess beyond any other nation in the world.”
Over its immense life of several millennia hundreds of millions of people engaged in the Egyptian religion, with its major themes and motifs well-known and highly respected. In fact, it has been estimated that some 500 million Egyptians were mummified during the time of the Pharaohs, indicating there were at least 1 billion followers of the Egyptian religion during that era. Hence, any competing faith would be hard-pressed to overturn this deep and enduring reverence for the Egyptian religion and its God, and would need to incorporate as much of the Egyptian mythos and ritual into itself as was possible to gain any attraction at all.
Black Madonna Child & Black Popes
In the Fourth Century, the cathedral at Chartres, France was dedicated to the Black Madonna. Numerous Black Madonna’s have been created all over the world including Germany, Italy, France, Poland, Switzerland and Spain. Our Lady of Montserrat in Spain is perhaps the best known Black Madonna statue. Because, legend contends that this statue was carved by St. Luke in Jerusalem, taken to Barcelona, and hidden in a cave near Montserrat to be rediscovered in 880 AD. Reverend Albert B. Cleage, founder and first holy patriarch of the Shrine of the Black Madonna Church, wrote of slavery’s impact on the minds and lives of enslaved Africans and subsequent generations. The psychological damage to the African is beyond comprehension, according to Rev. Cleage. Not only was the enslaved generation rendered psychologically ill, the effects have been culturally transmitted from generation to generation down to the present.
A mentally sick generation cannot but hand its sickness down to its children. This is especially true of a slave experience which never ended. The following information should be a part of what we teach our own and the rest of the world.
Three Black Popes and More!
Pope St. Victor was elected in 189 AD. He was deacon when he became Pope, a rarity then and now. He established a set date for the celebration of Easter yearly. He died a martyr for the faith in 199.
Pope St. Militiades Reigned as Pope from 311-314. He signed the emperor Constantine’s famous Edict of Milan in 313, ending the persecutions, and making Christianity the established religion of the empire. He was considered an excellent Pope, “a son of peace and father of Christians” according to St. Augustine.
Pope St. Gelasius—Reigned from 492-496. Born in Rome, he was renowned for his holiness, kindness and scholarship. He saved Rome from famine, composed a book of hymns for church use, was renowned for his concern for the poor and clarified church teaching on the Eucharist.
The New Testament of the Bible speaks of a “Simon from Cyrene in Africa” carrying the cross of Jesus (Luke 23:26). Acts 8 refers to a man from Ethiopia who was converted to Jesus at the preaching of the Apostle Phillip. From these Biblical events (and later missionary preaching), the Good News of Jesus spread quickly to Africa.
Most people are unaware that there was a vibrant Black Christianity and church life existing in North Africa. In the 2nd—3rd centuries, Ethiopia became a Christian country, as did Nubia south of Egypt; traces of their famed liturgy still exist today. These churches gave birth to numerous well-known Black Christians, many of whom were martyred for their beliefs. Examples are Moses the Black, Cyril of Alexandria, Perpetus, Benedict the Black, Felicity, John of Egypt and likely even the famous St. Augustine and his mother St. Monica.
Egypt: Genesis 10:6 And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan all Black People of Africa. Egypt (Kemet) the land of the Nile and the pyramids, the oldest kingdom of which we have any record, holds a place of great significance in Scripture.
The main body of the Africans had no history, but had stayed for untold centuries, sunk in barbarism. Historian Sir Reginald Copeland
Africa is the land where men are children a land beyond the daylight of self-conscious history let us forget Africa for Africa is no distort part of the world. Philosopher Frederick Hegel 1824
A Black skin means membership in a race of men which has never created a civilization of any kind. There is something natural in the subordination of an inferior race even to the point of enslavement of the inferior race. Scholar John Burgess
Almost all civilized peoples belong to the White race. The people of other races have remained savage or barbarian, like the men of prehistoric times. Professor Charles Seignobos: History of ancient civilization University of Paris.
Again, according to Herodotus, a Greek scholar who traveled to ancient Egypt, the ancient Egyptians have Black skins and woolly hair. The eyewitness testimony of Herodotus as reported in his work is also supported by the physical features of the ancient Egyptians as they portrayed themselves through art. The European elements that western historians have been proud to publicize to the world account for the immigration of foreigners (Asians and Greeks) and invasion of Egypt by Asians and Greeks, at the time when the glory of ancient Egyptian civilization had ceased to exist for a long period of time.
Ancient Egypt was a religious nation. Religion was one of the driving forces that greatly influenced the advance of technology in ancient Egypt. The Egyptians were the first to assign images and temples to the images of God; to practice circumcision; to make ceremonial meeting or solemn assemblies, processions and processional offering, and to make it an offence to have intercourse with women in temples or to enter the temples after intercourse without bathing. Ancient Egyptian religion was famous in ancient times.
Some modern scholars, based on the evidences recovered over the past years in Egypt, have found that the doctrine of monotheism, the legend of the creation of the world, the doctrine of life after death, the destruction of man (the deluge), the story of Moses, the life of Jesus Christ, the doctrine of virgin mother, and the doctrine of the trinity have creative parallels in the ancient (Kemet) Egyptian writings.
Most history classes are centered on European history and presented under the European context. African slavery and colonization were presented as the western divine mission to civilize Africans who were described as savages, uncivilized without history, language, and culture. According to the popular view, Africans have been savages and barbarians up to the arrival of Europeans who brought civilization to Africa. We grew up with this conception of the African savage that Europe injected into Africans mind using violence, racism, social injustice, and economical inequality. Many of us who grew up under the colonial education system did not understand the conditions the Africans were in during the slave trade and the colonial period. Modern scholars agree that the ancient African/Egyptian civilization was the world’s first and longest civilization created by mankind to date. Ancient Egyptian civilization lasted at least two thousand years from the unification of Lower and Upper Egypt by King Menes to the conquest of ancient Egypt by Alexander of Greece.
Kemet/Egypt says:
before Abraham I Am
Ta Seti was a city located south of Egypt in Nubia. The date of Ta Seti is about 3300 to 3500 BC. It is important because this is where the first king would come that unifies Egypt. Egyptian history starts around 3100 BC as the offspring of Cush according to some. We will focus on Kemet because Egypt has the most complete and best written records many of which are still there on the walls. During the first 1000 years Kemet was not invaded from the outside.
The Ancient Egyptians were very organized, and people often communicated with one another by letter in their daily existence. All government business was put in writing. The well-known proposition that “what cannot be put into documental form does not exist” was in force in Egyptian affairs. The Egyptians kept economic and labor records on papyri. These written communications followed a particular form—models of which have survived till today. Does this sound like a backward, savage, uneducated group of natives poorly dressed?
From 3000 to 2000 BC there were about 12 families of kings in 12 dynastic periods who ruled Egypt during that 1000 year period. Greece and Rome did not exist during that time. The pyramid age happened before Africa was invaded successfully by anyone from the outside. It is very important for you to know that the pyramid age occurred before Egypt was invaded.
The Hyksos people came into Kemet/Egypt around 1750 BC. This was also the time when Abraham comes into Egypt according the Bible from Ur of the Chaldeans. By the way:
There exist no contemporary records confirming the Abram Bible story. Keep in mind, there is no actual historical documentation saying that Jews as a people were ever enslaved by the Egyptians; ever.
Moses was also said, according to the Bible to have been born in Egypt around the time of Akhenaton in 1400 BC. These are approximately the dates which account for the 400 year sojourn of the 70 who turned into 12 families who became the Hebrew people. Listen carefully, a handful of Hebrews take up residence in Egypt, multiply significantly, and are first enslaved then set free. 70 persons arrive and multiply with a phenomenal, rabbit-like, productiveness to reach 3 million in 215 years which is an average of 66 children per female! Do you think that is possible?
Despite the mass of contemporary records that have been unearthed in Egypt, not one historical reference to the presence of the Hebrews/Israelites has yet been found there. Not a single mention of Joseph, the Pharaoh’s governor over the land. Not a word about Moses or the spectacular flight from Egypt and the destruction of the pursuing Egyptian army.—Magnus Magnusson, the Archaeology of the Bible Lands—BC, p43. (Slight word modification, author)
Listen, seventy people came into the most sophisticated, well developed nation with no match anywhere on the planet, well before there was a Greece or a Rome with architecture copied from Egypt later to be called Greco-Roman architecture. This great Black civilization was a highly developed African society with a structured division of labor, an advanced state of intellectual, cultural, and material development, marked by extraordinary progress in the arts and sciences, the extensive use of writing, and the appearance of complex political and social institutions. This highly evolved civilization acted in a civil manner with cooperation toward themselves and towards other people. This sophisticated cooperation was in the furtherance of community goals and the elevation of the individuals within the Egyptian civilization.
Egyptian cosmology is based on rational, spiritual, scientific and philosophical principles, of the universe as a sum total of reality. The totality of the Egyptian civilization was built upon a inclusive and accurate understanding of universal laws. This profound understanding manifested itself in a dependable, coherent and inter-related system, where art, science, philosophy and religion were intertwined, and were employed all together in a single natural Unity.
The Egyptians regarded the universe as a conscious act of creation by the One Great Almighty God. The primary set of guidelines was the unity of the Deity. This One God was never represented. It is the functions and attributes of his domain that were represented in ideas and picture form. Once a reference was made to his functions/attributes, he became a distinguishable driving force; reflecting this exacting function/attribute, and its authority on the world. His various functions and attributes as the Creator, Healer, and the like, were called the neteroo (singular: Neter in the masculine form and netert in the feminine form). As such, an Egyptian Neter/netert was NOT a god/goddess but the personification of a function/attribute of the one God.
Egypt was known for its Egyptian Mystery System or set of secret doctrines, since knowledge was power in those days. The roots of psychology go back to Egypt and the Egyptian mystery system. Early psychology focused on measuring and understanding the mind. Only the privileged few had access to knowledge and they kept this knowledge secret and passed most of it on in secret societies. The earliest scientific knowledge came from the Egyptians. In most philosophy and history of psychology textbooks, you will see credit being given solely to the Greeks. However, according to George G.M. James “Stolen Legacy” and Dr. Henry Olela, “From Ancient Africa to Ancient Greece: An Introduction to the History of Philosophy,” there is evidence that Egyptians laid the foundation for scientific knowledge.
It is known, that many of the early Greek philosophers studied in Egypt and brought back interpretations of African/Egyptian knowledge to Greece. Thales was one of the first to go into Egypt and bring back scientific knowledge into Greece. Thales had traveled to Egypt to study the science of geometry. He came back to Miletus and surprised his contemporaries with his unusual mathematical abilities. Thales calculated the distance of a ship at sea from observations taken on two points on land and he knew how to determine the height of a pyramid from the length of its shadow. He became famous for predicting an eclipse in 585 BC. And, after all this, Abraham became our Father?
Pythagoras was a pupil of Thales who studied in Egypt and Babylon. Pythagoras was a musician and mathematician. He studied for 34 years. At least 10 of those years were in Egypt before being taken to Babylon by the king of Persia who invaded Egypt. Pythagoras like Euclid is given credit for what is known as the Pythagorean Theorem—first formulated by Thales. Therefore, the history of psychology and mathematics really begins with ancient Egypt. Thales had visited Egypt and recommended that Pythagoras go to Egypt.
Pythagoras arrived in Egypt around 547 BC when he was 23 years old. He stayed in Egypt for 21 years learning a variety of things including geometry from Egyptian priests. It was probably in Egypt where he learned the theorem that is now called by his name. By the time he was about 55 years old he returned to Greece his native land and started a school on the island of Samos. However, because of the lack of students he decided to move to Croton in the south of Italy. In Croton he started a school which concentrated in the teaching and learning of Mathematics, Music, Philosophy, and Astronomy and their relationship with Religion. It is said that as many as 600 of the worthiest people in the city attended the school. The school reached its highest splendor around the year 490 BC. He taught the young to respect their elders and to develop their mind through learning. He emphasized justice based on equality. Calmness and gentleness were principles encouraged at the school. Pythagoreans became known for their close friendships and devotion to each other. More than anyone before him Pythagoras combined the spiritual teachings with the pursuit of knowledge and science.
Pythagorean mathematics, the theory of the four elements of Thales of Miletus, Epicurean materialism, Platonic idealism, Judaism, Islam, modern science are rooted in the Egyptian cosmogony and science.
Despite all of that documented history, Greece then becomes the model for what is now considered the foundation of western architecture, science and knowledge, but factually and historically, it was in Africa first! Greece slowly became a nation starting in about 1000 BC and Rome later developed beginning in about 600 to 700 BC. Europe was still inhabited by scattered communities of Stone Age hunters during the time of the Pyramids in Egypt.
African architecture was copied because it was built 1500 to 1300 BC, long before Europeans. The Greeks and Romans copied architecture from the Africans, no doubt about it. For thousands of years before the introduction of Christianity the Ancient World looked to Egypt as the foundation of spiritual wisdom and knowledge. With the rise of Rome and in a period of less than 300 years, the wisdom of Egypt was replaced with Christianity.
Listen to what European scholars wrote about us: But to imagine that this or any other primitive race, perhaps earlier than 3000 BC, had the abilities required to plan and construct such buildings is simply implausible. No. The evidence staring us in the face suggests that an incredibly advanced civilization of beings, with a fascination for astronomical matters, and possessing great strength and mathematical abilities, were the builders. If you watch the history channel they are always trying to suggest that extraterrestrial beings created or helped create the wonders of Egypt despite clear cut evidence.
Nevertheless, consider this: the most hallowed of Jewish festivals, the Passover, was borrowed from an Egyptian celebration of the Spring Equinox, of the passing of the sun from south to north of the equator. Passover, the most important feast of the Jewish calendar, is celebrated at the first full moon after the Vernal Equinox, typically occurring on March 21, though it can fall a day earlier or later.
Many millions of people, think the Bible is the inerrant word of God, whose commandments must be reverently obeyed and whose teachings should be our primary guide to community organization. So I found areas in the Bible difficult to understand like the following: Deuteronomy 34:6 says, “And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.” This passage not only describes Moses and his burial but also says that the location of his grave is unknown unto this day, indicating that the passage was written well after the death of Moses and couldn’t have been written by him.
As you read this you may or may not be aware that Kemetic/Egyptian priests thought and wrote about such subjects as creation, the soul, resurrection and judgment beyond the grave along with the idea of eternal life thousands of years before the writings of the Bible. Kemetic thinking on these subjects appears to be theologically impossible to differentiate from the beliefs that formed the core of Christian faith that has maintained that Christianity was a singular historical event without any equal anywhere. Also with any religion that is formed even today, it is not formed in a vacuum. Generally information already developed from known sources forms part or many parts of the newly adopted religious ideas and the same is true of the Biblical writings. Kemet and other religious stories, concepts, myths and stories were adopted by the Biblical writers.
The principles and precepts of the Osiris theology for example of Egypt are virtually identical in content and application to the main beliefs and precepts of Christianity as they present themselves in the Jesus narrative. Furthermore, the Egyptian theology existed as an unbroken historical stream of thought that began and developed within Egypt for almost three thousand years before being spread across the Mediterranean world by the Greeks. It finally came to rest in the Roman Empire and, in particular, in the Palestine of Jesus’ day written about in the Gospels. It was quite possibly adopted by Jesus and his followers as a new theological system. In fact when you look at what Jesus preached it was more an African point of view than it was Hebrew, Jewish, Greek or Roman.
As the Osiris, Isis and Horus story develops, Isis is impregnated by the Spirit pictured as a falcon. The child that resulted from this union was Horus. When Set (similar to today’s idea of the devil), learns about the child he knows that Horus will someday attempt to revenge his father. Set sets out to kill Horus. Isis hid in the reeds and swamps of the Nile Delta where she nursed and raised her son. (Does that story remind you of another story?) Portrayals of Isis holding the baby Horus were common images in Egypt for millennia, and their resemblance to the Christian images of Madonna and Child are striking.
Because of Horus’ devotion to his father, the gods gathered around Osiris’ grave and there was wailing and crying out. Horus offered his eye to his father as a token of filial devotion. From that day forward the eye of Horus cast in stone or metal became the most popular amulet among Egyptians.
Different parts of the Eye of Horus were used by the ancient Egyptians to represent one divided by the first six powers of two The right side of the eye = 1/2 The pupil = 1/4 The eyebrow = 1/8 The left side of the eye = 1/16 The curved tail = 1/32 The teardrop = 1/64 “The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus” contains tables of ‘Horus Eye Fractions’ This kind of historical information reverses the European Western ideas that Black people were savages and without knowledge of higher mathematics.
With the help of Anubis, the jackal god of embalmers, and the formulae repeated by Throth, the god of knowledge, Horus performed the ceremony of resurrection, the first expression of that radical idea in the history of mankind! The Osiris myth describes the great moment:
Oh Osiris the King, you have gone, but you will return. You have slept, but you will awake. You have died, but you will live. The tomb is open for you. The doors of the coffin are drawn back for you. The doors of the sky are thrown open for you.
~ The Pyramid Texts
The physical body established an important theological connection between man and god, for man was akin to Osiris in that both possessed a physical existence. No other Egyptian god ever became man, inhabited a physical body, endured a human existence, and suffered death. The fact that only Osiris and humans both possessed a physical body was what made it possible for humans to believe that Osiris would be a merciful judge. Only Osiris in his human incarnation truly knew the temptations and sufferings that human beings must endure in this life. Christian thinking on the subject of Jesus’ human nature is strikingly similar. A divine Jesus became truly human and suffered the same way any human would suffer a crucifixion. It was through this human suffering that Jesus made it possible for humans to attain eternal life.
Central to both their lives was their own betrayal, death, and resurrection, which occurred on or was connected with the time of the spring equinox. Through their lives they imitate what a seeker of truth goes through portrayed by their stories to reach what has been called salvation, eternal life, enlightenment, self-realization, immortality, imperishability, awakening and liberation. This is the deeper meaning of those stories, why they are similar and what a seeker of divine truth still goes through to reach true liberation today. These two stories are not limited to those two times and cultures. Many cultures have the same stories with different “saviors.” Religion cannot take you where sincere, heartfelt, spiritual, loving desire to spiritually evolve can take you.
Christianity developed at a time and place when the Osiris theology of Egypt was familiar and commonly practiced both in Palestine and throughout the Roman world. The “new” Christian theology arose within a cultural and historical atmosphere where the Egyptian Osiris theology was powerfully apparent and, perhaps, even dominant in the religious thinking of the day. The influence of Egyptian Osiris theology can therefore be shown to have been of that period with the emergence of Christianity, making it quite likely that any similarities between the two are more than accidental. Jesus adoption of a number of ritual practices that were already evident in the Osiris religion while being clearly condemned by the Judaism of his day were notable in his teaching and beliefs about baptism, life after death, judgment and resurrection. As a matter of fact, Pharaoh was raised to be a “son” of God and an intermediary between God and men Lord of the Two Lands and High Priest of Every Temple. The ancient Egyptians saw their Pharaoh as a god, more specifically as the god Horus. They thought that when the Pharaoh died, a new Horus was born to rule on earth, thus achieving eternal life. That idea is too large an area to cover in this book but I invite you to study on your own but does the idea sound familiar if you are a Christian?
Early “Church fathers,” such as Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and Irenaeus, were understandably disturbed and resorted to the desperate claim that these similarities were the result of diabolical mimicry. Using one of the most ridiculous arguments ever advanced, they accused the Devil of plagiarism by anticipation and of looking into the future and cunningly copying the future story of Jesus before it had actually happened in an attempt to mislead the gullible! Other Christians I have talked to have claimed that the myths of the ancient god men were like future vibrations based on the literal coming of Jesus, somewhat like premonitions or prophecies.
The European West is surely not where mankind’s moral conscience first emerged. It was in Egypt, long before there was a West at all, almost three thousand years before there were any Israelites, and four thousand years before there were any Christians, Kemet, land of the Blacks is where the evidence for the first rousing of moral conscience is found. It was Egypt that gave the world the gift of conscience. The circumstances of Egyptian development laid the basis for a society in which moral awareness, intellectual inquiry, and theological speculation flourished. The Egyptians saw life as a series of transformations: birth, growing up, parenthood, old age, death, followed by rebirth. In view of what you were taught in school and what our children learn today about Ancient Black people, this is astounding!
Carved in stone, thousands of these tomb inscriptions, called the Pyramid Texts, provide us with a valuable insight into Egyptian moral thinking. It is in these inscriptions that we find the earliest utterances of humans that they could be called to answer for their actions and that their actions on this earth might determine their eternal fate. This is a fundamentally important idea and completely original as far as we identify of judgment. It holds humans responsible for their conduct, and it is this responsibility and free will that rest at the center of all human ethics. Nowhere else in any history of any nation are we to find such thinking at so early a time in history.
Ancient peoples honored and respected Egypt as a beacon of wisdom and civilization. For the Egyptians themselves, the land the sacred, it belongs to God and was the closest place to paradise on earth. While other peoples lived as scattered tribes, Egypt was a country and it was the first and only nation state of the ancient world. The Samaritans, the Babylonians, the Trojans, and the Greeks had all forms city states, but not nation’s states as we understand them today. These little city states group, flourished, and were subjugated, and some vanished into oblivion, leaving little trace of their existence. But the Egyptians thrived on their culture and blossomed for more than 3000 years. They came to tower above all other civilizations and left behind a wealth of information about their way of life.
We do not have to wonder what it was like in Kemet. The murals on the temple walls and other places shows quite clearly a thriving, lively, energetic civilization engaged in all facets of life. Craftsmen are shown to have had surprising technical knowledge and skills in paintings, gold workers were highly skilled. Boat builders were shown have completed working on the hulls of great sea worthy vessels. Men with blow pipes are busy smelting metal while other craftsmen often are represented using sculptures and making statues. There were crafts, carpenters, leather workers, pottery workers and makers of stone vessels, rope makers and brick makers.
The proposition that the Pharaoh had moral responsibilities to his subjects, and that the exercise of power was accordingly limited by them, represents the dawn of a radically new idea found nowhere else in the ancient world at this time. For the first time in human history we find the doctrine that political authority depends upon the moral behavior of the ruler and on the moral content of his laws and judgments. Here, two thousand years before Plato, is the core idea of The Republic. The Republic written by Plato, is a class or category of artistic undertaking having a particular form, content, technique like prose and literary works developed in Greece at the turn of the fourth century BC, preserved today in the dialogues of Plato written by Plato around 380 BC concerning the definition of justice and the order and character of the just city-state and the just man.
For many years civilization was thought to have been first invented by the Sumerians, but the recent evidence shows that the invention of Ancient Egyptian writing and Ancient Egyptian architecture predate Sumerian civilization. The following report by the British team excavating the Ancient Egyptian city of Abdu (modern Abydos) dispels the misconceptions related to the first origins of writing in history. Until recently it was thought that the earliest writing system was invented by the Sumerians in Mesopotamia towards the end of the fourth millennium BC and that the idea was borrowed by the Egyptians at the beginning of the First Dynasty around3100 BC. However, recent discoveries at Abydos have shown that the Egyptians had an advanced system of writing even earlier than the Mesopotamians, some 150 years before Narmer.
It can be spoken and written with historical accuracy and authority that wherever ancient civilizations have emerged on the face of the earth, they were Black. Whether in Egypt, Ethiopia, Sumer, Asia, North America or South America each cultural center of the ancient world was Black and Blacks are the progenitors of humanity and the creative originators of culture and civilization.
Egyptians, and the Ethiopians, are the only nations who have practiced circumcision from the earliest times. The Phoenicians and the Syrians of Palestine themselves confess that they learned the custom of the Egyptians; oh I see, you thought it was a sign given to Abraham and Moses?
John 7:22 Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision; (not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man.
The early Greek Philosophers, Thales, Pythagoras, Plato and others acknowledged their debt to the Kemetic sages for their instruction in art, music, philosophy, etc. Several writers have demonstrated undeniably exact correlations between the religion of Ancient Egypt, Judaism and Christianity including circumcision.
The ancient Egyptians created and developed animal husbandry, agriculture, cosmetics, internal medicine and mortuary science, the calendar and the world’s first democracy. Yes, Black people created the natural sciences, including biology, chemistry, physics, astrology and astronomy. They also created mathematics encompassing arithmetic, algebra, calculus, geometry and trigonometry. They were the first on the planet in recorded human history to have invented architecture and civil and mechanical engineering. Finally, and probably most significantly, these are the people who invented writing and the world’s first three alphabets, which include the hieroglyphic, the hieratic script, and the phonetic script. Every alphabet used in the world today is based on one of these three alphabets created by the ancient Egyptians. There is, in fact no field of study which does not have its roots and foundation in Kemet. Among their many great achievements are the massive pyramids at Giza, the great temples at Karnak and Luxor, the Royal tombs at the Valley of the Kings.
The Egyptian temples were not built quickly, or by one king alone. Such temples were built over the centuries, by successive kings. A good example is the huge complex of the great Karnak Temple, which was built over a span of more than 1,500 years. The complex is the largest ancient religious site in the world. The Karnak Temple features six pylons, and is an imposing and harmonized achievement that produced a pleasurable plan of buildings covering about 7,550 ft in perimeter. Approximately thirty Pharaohs contributed to the buildings, enabling it to reach a size, complexity, and diversity not seen anywhere in the world then and now. It is obvious that the overall plan pre-existed and that it was known to those who made the additions over a span of more than 1,500 years.
This complex was a place of business and culture much like an abbey. Treasures of the ancient world passed through its corridors—gold and precious woods from Sudan, tribute from Syria, and vases from Crete. The Hypostyle Hall of the Temple of Amen was its greatest structure. It had 134 columns spread out over 56,000 square feet. It was the largest temple of its kind in Ancient Egypt. One could easily fit several European architectural works.” Outside of the Temple were a series of sphinxes representing Aries the Ram. They lined both sides of the walkway leading to the Temple. If one follows the line of sphinxes it takes us all the way from Karnak to the Temple of Amen in Luxor. The whole city of Waset had a circumference of nine miles and housed one million people.
The Egyptian temple was not a place of public worship. These truly divine places were accessible only to the priesthood, who could enter the inner sanctuaries, where the sacred rites and ceremonies were performed. Does this sound familiar? Did not Moses set up the temple worship in the temple in the wilderness that sounds just like what he was exposed too? In some instances, only the King himself or his authorized substitute had permission to enter. The general public participated in the many great festivals and celebrations held outside the temples in honor of the various deities. The public participation was a duty by everyone and an essential aspect in the “worship” process all designed to maintain the universal harmony.
Ancient Egypt was the first and most ancient civilization to create a religious system as well as an advanced spiritual philosophy of righteousness, called Maát. Several Temple systems were developed in Kemet and they were all related. The Kemetic pre-Judaic/Islamic religions that the later Jewish and Muslim religions drew from in order to create their own religions developed out of these. Later and still today they repudiate the source from where they originated. In any case, the Great Sphinx remains the oldest known religious monument in history that denotes high culture and civilization as well. Egypt and Nubia produced the oldest religious systems and their contact with the rest of the world led to the proliferation of advanced religion and spiritual philosophy. When it comes to religion basically all world religions have come from but one; namely, the Egyptian religion.
The religious aspect of principled awareness among the people was never very far from the surface of Egyptian life. The most noteworthy of these spiritual ideas was the belief in an afterlife conditional upon a final judgment of human conduct after death. In assessing the importance of the afterlife in Egyptian thinking the famous Egyptologist James H. Breasted noted that “among no people, ancient or modern, has the idea of a life beyond the grave held so prominent a place as among the ancient Egyptians.” the evidence is clear that the Egyptians were the first humans to systematically think and write about immortality.
The invention of writing around 3000 BC at the beginning of Egyptian history more than any other single change promoted growth in every direction. A scribe was trained in his first job by another scribe, and the children of important people could enter office very young perhaps about the age of 12 after his training or in later stages describe would rise gradually to the administrative hierarchy.
Literary texts were preserved both from schools and from other sources. They include narrative fiction, instruction religious and philosophical texts, poetry, Royal inscriptions and miscellaneous text used secondarily as literature. There were medical and mathematical text, rituals and mortuary books.
It is safe to assume that Egyptians were thinking and writing about life beyond death for a very long time. These ideas without doubt were developed over a long period of time into the sophisticated, comprehensive thoughts about immortality we see today in temples and burial chambers. This development is the result of study and extensive contemplation that required considerable intellectual ideas fused into the final theological themes.
It was thought in the 20th century that the Egyptian language as articulated in hieroglyphs was too exact to permit the maturity of theoretical terms. Writing in 1914, Gardiner argued that the Egyptians were not “philosophical” in that they did not influence conceptual terms. As with so much about Egypt, this determination was based upon incomplete information of the artifacts under assessment. The language of Egyptian theologians was indeed satisfactorily abstract and they arrived at such highly conceptual ideas as incarnation, the soul, a complete psychology of the human person, a psychology of the dead, ideas of political and social justice, the unity behind the intricacy of being and a triune god.
From the beginning the religion had its roots in Egypt’s prehistory and lasted for more than 3,000 years. Egyptian religion remained centered upon the several beliefs. Despite what you may have heard, they were focused on a single triune god and the Egyptian conception of the universe centered on Ma’at, a word that encompasses several concepts, including “truth,” “justice,” and “order.” It was the fixed, eternal order of the universe, both in the heavens and in human society derived from this one god. A cosmology in which all things, man, god, animal and nature, have a place that can be comprehended by man; linked by their common focus on the interaction between the world of humans and the world of the divine. A highly developed idea like man’s personal possession of an immortal soul and human’s possession of the ka, or life-force, which left the body at the point of death.
The idea of a soul was among the earliest theological concepts invented by the Ethiopian/Egyptians, appearing for the first time in written form during the Pyramid Age but having existed for at least a millennium before that in Ethiopian/Egyptian religious thinking as contained in the Osiris myth from Ethiopia. The idea of an immortal soul did not, however, characterize the theological thinking of any other major near eastern or western culture of the ancient world. None of these cultures, Sumerian, Babylonian, Canaanite, Israelite, Persian, Iranian, Greek or Roman developed the idea on their own and none except the Greek and Roman cultures adopted it and that was after contact with the Egyptians.
Each person also had a ba; the set of spiritual characteristics unique to each individual. Resurrection of the dead is a continual theme having graduated from just relating to the Pharaoh. Gradually all Egyptians came to believe that possession of a ba and the possibility of a glorious afterlife was extended to everyone. A final judgment was to happen beyond the grave where man’s ethical life is weighed and an eternal life for the upright was possible. These values continued to characterize Egyptian theology from its beginning until its destruction in the fourth century AD.
Egyptians transformed themselves into a belief of a single god that was expressed as a triune entity in which all three persons were present, distinct, and equally divine, very much like Christianity. The Egyptian standards of a natural order that is encompassing of all things is appropriate to each thing and its nature. This principle explained the place of man and god in the universe. God himself must follow Ma’at, a principle that early on transformed the Egyptian god into a just and loving god. Therefore when the Persians conquered Egypt in 525 B.C., followed by Alexander and the Greeks in 332 B.C, and then by the Romans in 31 B.C, all three cultures encountered a deity whose character none had encountered before.
Only in Egypt does one find another people of the ancient world beginning to think of their god as genuinely monotheistic, merciful, and just. These people were the Hebrews. Their early Mosaic theology had transformed itself into a truly monotheistic, morally one that affirmed a universal god of justice and mercy. The principles of Egyptian theology seem without question to be derived from the absorption of the Osiris myth into the body of conventional Christian thinking and writing.
The central theological beliefs of Egyptian religion were transmitted to the West through the Greek and Roman occupations of Egypt. This is in itself an astonishing detail. Here we find a doctrine of eternal life and the resurrection of a glorified body based upon an ancient story of the resurrection of Osiris after suffering a cruel and horrible death inflicted by the powers of evil, Seth that is at least four thousand years old and unchanged in its essentials throughout all periods of Egyptian history before being transmitted to the West. Seth is the ancient Egyptian god of chaos, the embodiment of hostility and even of outright evil, again, (very similar to the Devil of the Bible). He is also a god of war, deserts, storms, and foreign lands. As the god of deserts he causes sandstorms which bring him into conflict with the god Osiris. The two are adversaries and in the Osiris myths, Seth killed his brother and scattered the remains all over Egypt.
The people of Kemet were not polytheists nor did they believe in many different Gods. What they discovered and promoted was insightful and powerful. Animism is the concept that all things in the universe are animated (energized) by life forces. This idea was misinterpret by Europeans who did not understand the depth of African understanding of spiritual and material reality. Animism encompasses the beliefs that there is no separation between the spiritual and physical (or material) world, and souls or spirits exist, not only in humans, but also in all other animals, plants, rocks, geographic features such as mountains or rivers, or other entities of the natural environment. This simply fosters the idea that the force of the almighty is in everything. This concurs, scientifically, with the kinetic theory, where each minute any particle of any matter is in constant motion, therefore energized with life forces.
The Egyptian religion was not a form of zoolatry or animal worship. The Egyptians sages recognized animals as functional types as the embodiments of principles. The idea that Egyptians were primitive when it comes to religious thought pales in the face of such elegant presentation of divine thought and principles.
Take a look at how Egyptians saw the God force or consciousness in everything: Look at Elephants with their enormous eyes and the strength of the elephant which symbolizes the enormous will of the human spirit and the strength that keeps the human spirit stable and balanced.
The crocodile waits still in the water for sometimes weeks at a time, waiting for prey to either crossover, or come to the banks to satisfy their thirst. When they do, the crocodile strikes. Therefore the crocodile represents cleverness, mental steadiness, and extreme patience.
Baboons sit in groups and watch the sunrise and this behavior symbolizes contemplation or thought. Once the sun rises the baboon begins their daily function, as if there consciousness, like the African, is connected and responsive to the Sun. Their behavior also indicates contemplation, meditation then ascension; a model for human spiritual development. The baboon represents this state in humans, just before they gain consciousness—the awakening.
The heart of the African was considered the source of all life and thought much like what you find in the Bible. Proverbs 23:7 “For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he:” The heart was also connected with the ba or soul of the African.
The Ebis bird folds its wings and its body takes on the shape of the heart, which is the seat of the soul or ba.
The stubbornness of the donkey represented the rebellious and rebellion of set.
The lion had the most profound effect on the ancient Kemetic thought. The lion’s mighty strength symbolizes the mighty strength of the African.
If you have not looked or studied your own Black history then let me just give you a small view of our glorious history. The Ancient Egyptians believed in One God who was self-produced, self-existent, omnipotent, immortal, invisible, eternal, omniscient and almighty. This One God was represented through the functions and attributes of “His” domain through words called the Medu Neter (the words of God). So long before the first words of the Bible were written down you had writings considered “the words of God.” Written and spoken words were believed to have power in themselves. For example, again the Egyptians called their script ‘Medu Neter’ (i.e. word of God). The Greeks called the script ‘hieroglyphics’ (i.e. sacred writings).
The cosmological knowledge of Ancient Egypt was expressed in story form, which is a superior means for expressing both physical and metaphysical concepts. Well crafted allegories are the only way to explain the deepest truths about God, creation, life, the soul, our place in the universe, and our struggle to evolve to higher levels of insight and understanding. Allegories are an intentionally chosen means for communicating knowledge. Allegories dramatize cosmic laws, principles, processes, relationships and functions, and express them in an easy to understand way.
The Egyptians regarded the universe as a conscious act of creation by the One Great God. The fundamental doctrine was the unity of the Deity. This One God was never represented. It is the functions and attributes of his domain that were represented. These attributes or different views of God’s attributes were called the Neteru (pronounced net-er-u; masculine singular: Neter; feminine singular: netert). The terms gods and goddesses are a misrepresentation of the Egyptian term, Neteru.
As I alluded to before, when we ask, “Who is God?” we are really asking, “What is God?” The mere name or noun does not tell us anything. One can only define “God” through the multitude of “His” attributes, his qualities, his powers and his actions. To know “God” is to know the numerous qualities of “God”. The Bible uses multiple names to express the numerous aspects of what God is like. Egyptians used names and pictures combined with the Godlike qualities in various animals. None worshiped animals, period. The more we learn of these Egyptian qualities (known as Neteru), the closer we are getting to a more complete picture of God in our mind. Far from being a primitive, polytheistic form, this is the utmost expression of monotheistic theology. No culture has ever practiced the principles of spirituality like the Ancient Egyptians thousands of years before Greece and Rome existed and also before Moses and Abram existed. A really good book on this subject which I highly recommend is: Egyptian Divinities: The All Who Are the One by Moustafa Gadalla.
My research and presentation of the material in this book from many sources is to demonstrate to you without question that our ancestry is great and glorious. Central to the Egyptians inclusive understanding of the universe was the knowledge that man was made in the image of God. Egyptian symbolism and all measures were therefore simultaneously scaled to man, to the earth, to the solar system, and ultimately to the universe. The logical way to explain anything to human beings is on human terms and in human form. How can we explain God without using human terms? How else can you accomplish this task?
Coming from Black people emerged the complex scientific and philosophical information that was reduced in Ancient Kemet to events found in human images and terms. Picturing the Divine Powers in order to simplify and convey the scientific and philosophical meanings of the Neteru representations were utilized. As a result, the figures of the original trinity Aset (Isis), Ausar (Osiris), Amen, Heru (Horus), became the symbols of such attributes, functions, forces and energies. These pictorial symbols were intended merely to fix the attention or represent abstract ideas, and were not planned to be looked upon as real personages. As the saying goes, a picture is worth a thousand words.
In Kemetic symbolism, the precise roles are revealed in many ways including but not limited by the form of dress, the headdress, crown, feather, animal, plant, color, position, size, each gesture, sacred object, flail, scepter, staff or ankh. This magnificent and highly intelligent symbolic language represents a wealth of physical, physiological, psychological and spiritual data in the presented symbols. The genius of this method of conveying spiritual truth becomes more evident as you study under someone or study written material that makes the mysteries unfolds. Although we look these days at everything in isolation, for the Ancient Egyptians this would have been unthinkable. What we now term as a holistic approach to life was normal for the Egyptians. Even the Animal Symbolism Black people of Kemet used reveals and promote careful observation and profound knowledge of the natural world enabled them to identify certain animals with specific qualities that could symbolize certain divine functions and principles. A common example is how some figures are shown with two right/left hands. An active right hand symbolizes giving. An active left hand signifies receiving.
The excellent psychical and spiritual condition of the Egyptians was attributed to their application of metaphysical realities in their daily life, in other words total cosmic consciousness. As above so below and as below so above was the main law of existence for them. There was no apparent difference between the sacred and the mundane. Every action, no matter how mundane, was in some sense a cosmic corresponding act like plowing, sowing, reaping, brewing, playing games all were viewed as earthly symbols for divine activities. The scenes of daily activities, found inside Egyptian tombs, showed a strong perpetual correlation between the Earth and the heavens. In Egypt, what we now call religion was so widely acknowledged that it did not even need a name, because it is life itself in all its marvelous aspects. All their knowledge was based on cosmic consciousness and it was embedded into their daily practices, which became traditions.
The sacred group of Isis, Osiris, and Horus was transmitted to Rome where, by the time of Christ, it had become the most popular religious faith of Romans, especially Roman soldiers. The period of Ptolemaic rule in Egypt succeeded in preserving and reinvigorating the four thousand year-old Egyptian religious tradition and passing it on to the West.
Priests and laymen of the Isis/Osiris belief system travelled throughout the empire spreading the “good news” of salvation and resurrection. This happened long before St. Paul spread the good news to the Christians. The priests and lay followers of Isis spread their gospel to the people of the Mediterranean basin. The sect of Isis as the goddess most responsible for resurrection and insuring a fair judgment spread quickly. The attraction of this old theology in new form can be explained on two grounds. First, the “new” religion possessed the power to do what no Greek or Roman religion of the time could do, and that was the power to console through the power of resurrection. The gods of the Romans and Greeks, as well as those of the other cultures of the Near East, promised man nothing.
Isis is the Greek name for the original Egyptian pronunciation Aset. She is a goddess in Ancient Egyptian religious beliefs, whose worship spread throughout the Greco-Roman world. She was worshipped as the ideal mother and wife as well as the patroness of nature. She was the friend of slaves, sinners, artisans, and the downtrodden, and she listened to the prayers of the wealthy, maidens, aristocrats, and rulers.
Plutarch, a Greek scholar who lived from 46 CE to 120 CE, wrote, Isis and Osiris, which is considered a main source about the very late myths about Isis. In it he writes of Isis, describing her as: “a goddess exceptionally wise and a lover of wisdom, to whom, as her name at least seems to indicate, knowledge and understanding are in the highest degree appropriate . . .”
We usually think of Isis as an Egyptian goddess, but she was also worshipped by the Greeks after Alexander the Great conquered Egypt. When the Romans conquered both Egypt and Greece itself, the worship of Isis was so powerful that it spread throughout the Roman Empire. She was venerated as a loving mother goddess who promoted fertility, oversaw the changing of the seasons, and healed the sick. She was also the patron of sailors. There were temples dedicated to Isis and her brother/husband Osiris throughout the Greco-Roman world. These temples were the sites of elaborate daily and annual rituals and were administered by an educated priesthood skilled in music and medicine. Isis worship was especially popular with women and with the new elite who gained wealth and prominence as the Roman Empire expanded.
So appealing was the goddess Isis that over 3,000 years after her name appeared in Egypt, her worshippers were building temples to honor her in Europe, temples all the way up to the Rhine and Danube Rivers in Germany and as far north as Britain. In the book, Black Women in Antiquity edited by Ivan Van Sertima, the article about Isis by McKinney-Johnson she quotes from a hymn recorded at Philae Egypt:
“I am Nature, the universal Mother, mistress of all the elements, primordial child of time, sovereign of all things spiritual, queen of the dead, queen also of the immortals, the single manifestation of all gods and goddesses that are. My nod governs the shining heights of Heaven, the wholesome sea-breezes, the lamentable silences of the world below.”
For 300 to 600 years after the Nicene council, the Roman emperors, and later on, the Christian leaders, set about to destroy any vestige of religious doctrines that did not comply with the doctrines of their new religion including the temples of Isis. The crusades, inquisitions and excommunications were later attempts to promote ignorance among the masses of people and subjugation to the church authorities in all matters.
We are not informed of these ideas in the American school system. Listen to how powerful this information is and could be to building the self esteem of African/American children that a Black goddess was worshiped by Greeks and Romans. Think about it, we as a people were held in such a high place of respect and yet you are taught that you have produced nothing. This is all the more important why this and other books must be written about African History. This is why we need to teach our own history to our own children. Jews do it; Catholics do it, why not us? What are we afraid of?
“When your conqueror makes you ashamed of your culture and your history, he needs no prison walls and no chains to hold you.”
Dr. Henrik Clarke.
America’s governmental strategy is to take our mind as far away from Africa as possible, while simultaneously forcing a racist American education into our mentality. Once internalized and accepted, we then promote the very American falsehoods and social agendas that are predicated on our own exploitation. American education thereby becomes a vehicle to keep you, and the African, ignorant of self as well as ignorant of the real truth of European thought and behavior.
The American government, via the media, works overtime distorting the truth about Africa. The medium makes today’s Africa out to be nothing more than a continental war and famine. That is a major misconception. The Europeans behavior has never demonstrated in fact so-called peace understanding and brotherhood for anybody or anything.
The bottom line is that the European deliberately and fraudulently stole the Africans theory and observation he then revised and re-titled it and proceeded to market with his stamp of approval. Those who are referred to as the forefathers of the European race or Greek philosophers, and are proclaimed to be the first, the founders formulators, inventors, creators, philosophers, historians, Kings, Queens, nobles, etc. They are historically documented by today’s Europeans as forefathers or founders, when in truth they founded absolutely nothing; they formulated absolutely nothing, and created absolutely nothing. In fact the foundation of European so-called religious ideology comes directly from original African Kemetic concepts. The primary objective of the Europeans at the beginning and still is today, was to have plagiarized the Africans original thought then credit themselves as the founders of those thoughts observations, conclusions, and solutions.
During the first 2000 years of history from 4000 to 2000 BC the only nations that attain to a high degree of civilization and that’s ancient Egypt, Sumer, Babylon, Canaan, and Kush meaning Ethiopia. Although it is well known to all serious historians that all these nations were black, to this day much effort is being made to hide the fact from the general population. It is well known that Western civilization had attained to very little cultural development, as well is the fact that they are indebted to black nations for the foundation of their scientific, religious, and philosophical accomplishments. They have repaid these nations by utterly destroying their civilizations, and enslaving their descendents. They have taken the traditions of these black nations added a few touches here or there to make it more in keeping with some of their social values, and then claimed that the final product was a revelation from God to them.
The Temple of Isis
The Temple of Isis in Pompeii was small but ornate. It was destroyed in an earthquake in AD.62 but was rebuilt shortly after that. The renovation was financed by a freed slave in the name of his young son. There may have been political motivations for this since freed slaves were not allowed to hold public office. The Temple has a mixture of Egyptian, Greek, and Roman architectural features. This is not surprising since Roman architecture of this period was very ornate, often used bright colors, and borrowed and mixed styles from many eras. There were many statues in the Temple of Isis and the portico walls were covered with elaborate murals. To the left of the temple was located a small roofless structure containing a tank that may possibly have held the sacred water from the Nile. This was very important in many worship ceremonies of Isis. In the rear of the sanctuary was a room containing a marble table where sacred meals were in all probability served.
When the Roman Empire took control of Egypt, the Egyptian religion spread throughout the Roman Empire. Even the Greek father of history Herodotus’ reports of the Greek embracing of Egyptian deities, archeological evidence in the 4th century BC shows that Athens was principally a center of the Egyptian religion, and shrines to Isis, both public and private, was erected in many parts of Greece at that period. In Magna Graecia, the monuments found in Catania in Sicily show that this city was a center of the worship of Egyptian deities. Southern Italy contained many temples of Isis, and the remains of statues, found in Reggio, Puteoli, Pompeii, and Herculaneum prove that the worship of Egyptian deities must have been very common.
In Rome, in the 1st century BC, Isis was regarded as the principal goddess of the city. Great buildings and temples were set up in her honor, filled with Egyptian objects, obelisks, altars, statues, etc, which were brought from Egypt in order to make the shrines of Isis to bear a resemblance to those of her native country. Priestesses, who professed to be well acquainted with the mysteries, dwelt in or near these temples and assisted in performing services and ceremonies in which large congregations participated. From Rome, the reverence for Isis as you would expect spread to the provinces and beyond.
The Ancient Egyptians did not need any new enlightenment from the Christians, since the very thing that is now called the Christian religion was already in existence in Ancient Egypt, long before the adoption of the New Testament. The British Egyptologist, Sir E. A. Wallis Budge, wrote in his book, The Gods of the Egyptians [1969], the new religion (Christianity) which was preached there by Saint Mark and his immediate followers in Egypt, so closely resembled the worship of Osiris, Isis, and Horus. The main difference between the Egyptian and the New Testament versions is that the Gospel tale is considered historical and the Egyptian Ausar/Heru story is an allegory.
Herodotus visited Egypt during the 5th century BC. He devoted the second volume of his Histories to accounts about Egypt. Herodotus spoke highly of Egypt, and stressed Greece’s indebtedness to it. Herodotus stated that the Egyptians culturally and scientifically surpassed all other societies of the world. Herodotus began his account of Egypt in his Histories, by stating, now, let me talk more of Egypt for it has a lot of admirable things and what one sees there is superior to any other country.
The day-to-day life of the Egyptians was enlivened by a large number of festivities, most of them religious in nature. One can sense the liveliness of their participation in these activities from the depictions on the walls of the temples. Herodotus described the festive atmosphere of a religious occasion, with all the participants including men and women, poor and rich all singing, dancing, chanting, applauding, eating and drinking. As a consequence of their earthly state of mind, they were also fundamentally pragmatic and down to earth and the most humble of people. In the hundreds of discovered Ancient Egyptian texts and papyri found on various subjects including medicine, mathematics and the like, there is never any credit in a finding or achievement attributed to any single person or persons. Egyptians consider that every achievement and talent is a gift from God, and credit can only be given to Him.
The Egyptians saw life as a series of transformations: birth, growing up, parenthood, old age, death, followed by rebirth. Having existed since the time of the earliest Ancient Egyptian dynasties (5,500 BC), the Pyramid Texts describe the journey of the human soul in the realm of the afterlife and what each man and woman must do and know while still on earth, to survive death and thereby “come forth” into the light of “day,” meaning life, illumination, self-knowledge, eternal happiness, resurrection and enlightenment. The Self ultimate reality is not known through study of scriptures nor through subtlety of the intellect, nor through much learning; but by him who longs for it is it known.
However, when Christianity took hold in Rome, the Ancient Egyptian religion and other mystical religions became an obstacle to the Christian Church which had developed. Divergent ideas about spirituality, and also to the Roman government which sought to consolidate the empire under Rome found it necessary to eliminate the competition in religious thought. The ancient Egyptian religion referred people to Egypt as well as to individual spiritual practice. Therefore, it was politically expedient to close all mystical religion temples. At the end of the fourth century AD, the Roman emperor Theodosius decreed that all religions except Christianity were to be stopped and all forms of Christianity eliminated. He overpowered and fostered the destruction of some prominent pagan temples: the Serapeum in Alexandria, the Temple of Apollo in Delphi, and the Vestal Virgins in Rome. During this time The Temple of Isis (Aset) at Philae in Upper Egypt (Deep South of Egypt) temporarily escaped the enforcement of the decree. It was not until the sixth century AD, that Emperor Justinian entered a second decree which effectively stopped all mystical religious practices in the Roman Empire. This means that not only were the Mystery schools and temples to be closed, but also all forms of Christianity which did not agree with the style of Christianity espoused in Rome were to be abolished.
Therefore, the task of all true mystics (spiritual seekers) is to go beyond the veil of the outer forms of religion, including the symbols, but more importantly, the doctrines, rituals and traditions. The reason for life and the means to master it through intuitional wisdom are available to all. In this process of maturing consciousness, intellectual wisdom and knowledge gradually become intuitive. This process leads to greater and greater expansion of the mind and eventually to complete psychological liberation from worldly attachments. Thereby, one achieves a level of psychological experience which is completely peaceful and transcendental. We need this kind of understanding and practical practice today more than ever!
All forms of Christianity which did not agree with the style of Christianity espoused in Rome were to be abolished. Therefore, the Gnostic Christians were persecuted, their churches rededicated to Roman Catholicism and much of their writings were destroyed.
Every human being is a latent spiritual potential, like a seed. We live and yet we are asleep to the greater realities of existence, and to the greater reality of who we are and what we came here to do. At least in my life as I look back I find that to be very true.
Whether we choose to realize it or not, each of us has the potential to become an awakened self-realized being. I know this to be true through experience so my view of spiritual growth has been enhanced dramatically. This is why some of the sacred texts from ancient times and still today, always point towards enlightenment as the ultimate goal of life.
Having gone through the beginning stages of belief in the Bible and in the redemptive power of Jesus, I then experienced the indwelling power of the Holy Spirit having received that unforgettable moment of the indwelling one day at noon day prayer. Both of those experiences brought about a new consciousness along with testing, failure, renewal, falling away, resurrection and new realization. The newest level of freedom has come from intense, sustained meditational practices. Once I began to meditate consistently, I began to experience a level of freedom and peace that is almost in not possible to relay in words. Even the initial experiences in Biblical thought could not compare to the dimensional levels of sustained peace attained through meditation. As my Pastor and friend Richard Bullard, Pastor of Grace Evangelical Church says in his attempt to explain his experience, “I became addicted to the peace.”
Many writings that were called “Gnostic” or “Knowing” Gospels were “deleted” from the standard text by Roman Emperor Constantine and the church authorities under the control of the Roman Empire. In the Essene Gospel of Peace, translated by Edmond Bordeaux Szekeley in the early twentieth century from a copy which was locked away in the Vatican, Jesus states that his teachings are to help guide others to attain his level of consciousness, Cosmic Consciousness, to become as he was: Christ. The same teaching is found in the Gospel of Thomas, one of several early Gnostic Christian texts which were found in Egypt, and then edited and altered by the Nicene Council and the Roman (find this and use it as a direct quote from that book)
Emperor Constantine. Thus, in the light of the Gnostic texts, the phrase “being saved through Jesus” refers more to a metaphorical reliance on Jesus rather than to a literal understanding. It means that an individual may affect his or her own salvation by studying and practicing the teachings of Jesus, and not that you need Jesus himself to act as mediator between you and God to attain salvation. The following scripture is an example of those ideas.
And Jesus answered: “Seek not the law in your scriptures, for the law is life, whereas the scripture is dead. I tell you truly, Moses received not his laws from God in writing, but through the living word. The law is living word of living God to living prophets for living men. In everything that is life is the law written. You find it in the grass, in the tree, in the river, in the mountain, in the birds of heaven, in the fishes of the sea; but seek it chiefly in yourselves. For I tell you truly, all living things are nearer to God than the scripture which is without life. God so made life and all living things that they might by the everlasting word teach the laws of the true God to man. God wrote not the laws in the pages of books, but in your heart and in your spirit. They are in your breath, your blood, and your bone; in your flesh, your bowels, your eyes, your ears, and in every little part of your body. They are present in the air, in the water, in the earth, in the plants, in the sunbeams, in the depths and in the heights. They all speak to you that you may understand the tongue and the will of the living God. But you shut your eyes that you may not see, and you shut your ears that you may not hear. I tell you truly, that the scripture is the work of man, but life and all its hosts are the work of our God. Wherefore do you not listen to the words of God which are written in His works? And wherefore do you study the dead scriptures which are the work of the hands of men?” The Essene Gospel of Peace.
Alert: Black Man writes most
of the New Testament!
Acts 21:37-38 states that Paul, (Shaul in Hebrew) the apostle, was being led into a castle by a chief captain. Paul spoke to the chief in Greek, asking permission to speak with him. The chief captain was surprised that Paul could speak Greek and in Verse 38, asks Paul, “Are not you that EGYPTIAN?” Paul responded, (Verse 39) “I am a man of Israel (Hebrew).”
In order for this chief captain to mistake Paul (the Hebrew) for a Black-skinned Egyptian, Paul had to look like an Egyptian, as scripture tells us the whole nation of Israel did. This is why in the book of Matthew 2:13, the angel of Yah told Joseph to arise and take the young child Yahshua, (The Messiah’s true Hebrew name is Yahshua) and his mother Mary (Miriam in Hebrew) and flee into Egypt. He was told to stay there until he received further instruction, because Herod would seek the young child to destroy him.
Again and again I present this: According to Herodotus, a Greek scholar who traveled to ancient Egypt and was there, the ancient Egyptians have Black skins and woolly hair. The eyewitness testimony of Herodotus as reported in his work is also supported by the physical features of the ancient Egyptians as they portrayed themselves through art.
Joseph, Miriam and Yahshua were told to flee into Egypt, (Africa) not for military protection, because during this time, Egypt was a Roman province under Roman control. They fled into Egypt because Egypt was still a “Black” country, populated by a majority of Black-skinned people (Egyptians). Joseph, Miriam and Yahshua would have been just another Black-skinned family among many. Remember, they fled into Egypt to hide from Herod who was seeking to kill Yahshua.
Acts 21:38 Art not thou that Egyptian, which before these days madest an uproar, and leddest out into the wilderness four thousand men that were murderers?
Once again, let me say that in this scripture the soldier looking at Paul thought he was an Egyptian. Egyptians were Black. There is no doubt about that. However, when you view the fact that Paul looked Black, so did the disciples and our Lord. So, we have a White European government who put Paul to death, Peter and Jesus including countless numbers of martyrs in the coliseum. Rome is considered by historians to be one of the greatest civilizations ever but, who in the world would think of a public spectacle of putting people to death in mass numbers as a form of entertainment and think that was a great civilization?
Ancient Egyptian philosophy maintains that all creation is of spiritual origin and that man holds the seed of the divine within. Man’s life goal is to cultivate that seed and be rewarded with reunification with his divine origin and eternal life if successful.
The way of the Ancient Egyptian religion was a system of practices designed with the goal of awakening the dormant higher faculties. Awakening of the faculties was crucial to Ancient Egyptian religion, so for example exemplary behavior is acquired by experience and by the mind.
Every act, thought and deed was believed to make an imprint on the heart; the inward being of a person was reflected by his deeds and actions. Good deeds established good inner qualities.
As the soul acquires attributes from good deeds and actions, it matures leading to incremental mystical visions and the ultimate reunification with the Divine.
In practice, Ancient Egyptian traditions placed great emphasis on character building, family values, benefits of marriage, societal duties, work ethics, accountability, harmonic relationships etc.
Ancient Egyptian religion is distinguished by its emphasis on personal character rather than dogma so familiar in the dominant religions of today!
I believe that Paul’s ideas in the New Testament reflect this kind of thinking. Paul knew more about the “mind of Christ,” than the disciples who walked with him. I believe mainly that is because Paul spent years alone communing with the divine on “the back side of the desert.”
When you take the color of people out of the Biblical discussion and are left with the television characterization of history, a significant and important view of history is lost. Original Hebrews looked like members of the Black race as indicated by history and the Bible.
Black Egyptian science, medicine, mathematics and astronomy were all of an exponentially higher order of refinement and sophistication than modern scholars will acknowledge. The whole of Egyptian civilization was based upon a complete and precise understanding manifested itself in a consistent, coherent and inter-related system that fused science, art and religion into a single organic unity. Every aspect of Egyptian knowledge seems to have been complete almost at the very beginning of four dynasties. The sciences, artistic and architectural techniques and the hieroglyphic system show no signs of an extended period of development. It is almost as if genius burst upon the African Continent in a spectacular way. The achievements of those earlier dynasties were never surpassed by the centuries that followed.
Philosophy and science is commonly accepted as Greek inventions. The rise of Greek civilization which produced this outburst of intellectual activity is one of the most spectacular events in history. What events set off this sudden unfolding of the Greek genius? Philosophy and science is supposed to be the brain child of Thales of Miletus in the early sixth century BC. However Thales studied in Egypt and there are other proofs that Science and Philosophy began in Kemet, land of the Blacks.
James Gow writes, in A Short History of Greek Mathematics (1884): It remains only to cite the universal testimony of Greek writers, that Greek geometry was derived from Egypt. And that the latter country remained for many years afterwards the chief source of mathematical teaching.
The lands in Egypt about 1400 B.C. were for taxation purposes separated into rectangular plots and use of geometry to measure parts of lands flooded by the Nile in order to reduce taxes proportionally. So also in Plato’s Phaedrus Socrates is made to say that the Egyptian god Thoth first invented arithmetic and geometry and astronomy. Aristotle also (Metaph. I. 1) admits that geometry was originally invented in Egypt, and Eudemus expressly declares that Thales studied there. Much later Diodorus (B.C. 70) reports an Egyptian tradition that geometry and astronomy were the inventions of Egypt, and says that the Egyptian priests claimed Solon, Pythagorus, Plato, Democritus, and Oenopides of Chios as their pupils. Strabo gives further details about the visits of Plato and Eudoxus. He relates that they came to Egypt together, studies there thirteen years, and that the houses where they lived were still shown in Heliopolis. Later writers, of course, have the same tale, and it is needless to collect further evidence. Beyond question, Egyptian geometry, such as it was, was eagerly studied by the early Greek philosophers, and was the germ from which in their hands grew that magnificent science to which every Englishman is indebted for his first lessons in right seeing and thinking.
Science and science based disciplines; philosophy and rational science were the creations of Greece are assumptions that have been accepted by almost every scientist and scholar for the last two hundred years is false. Egyptologists stand helpless in the face of Kemet’s accomplishments. In all our schooling we are taught that Egyptians were a people who worshiped a grotesque of animal-headed gods and a people devoid of real mathematics, science, astronomy or medicine.
As they observed the movement of the planets and stars they realized that it was possible to predict the movement of heavenly bodies. They related the orderly way of the cosmos to the orderly way of life on earth (plants, animals, elements, etc.) and the orderly factors which govern the existence of humanity and all of nature. In this manner natural laws were studied and understood. Through this study which spanned many thousands of years, certain realizations emerged. The early philosophers discovered that the fundamental laws of existence by which all things in the universe are governed are Immediate, Universal, Invariable, Evident, Reasonable, Just, Beneficent, and Permanent.
Moral behavior, for example, does not come about from merely learning certain values, but is gained by both the mind and acquired by experience. Inner purification must be completed by practicing good social behavior daily in life. Every action impresses itself upon the heart. The inward being of a person is really the reflection of his deeds and actions. Doing good deeds thus establishes good inner qualities; the virtues impressed upon the heart in turn govern the actions of the limbs. As each act, thought, and deed makes an image on the heart, it becomes an attribute of the person. Let me say this again: This maturation of the soul through acquired attributes leads to progressive mystical visions and the ultimate unification with the Divine.
The Ancient Egyptian wisdom has always laid great emphasis on the cultivation of ethical behavior and service to society. The Egyptian traditions and practices emphasize character building, good behavior, family values, desirability and benefits of marriage, harmonic relationships, societal duties, work ethics, accountability, etc. The Ancient Egyptian religion is not a matter of creed and dogma, but rather of a personal charter. Each one of us is an individual. The Egyptian model recognizes the uniqueness of each individual, and as such recognizes that the Paths to God are as numerous as the number of seekers. The ways to God are like streams—they all flow to one source.
The concept of Ma-at has permeated all Egyptian writings, from the earliest times and throughout Egyptian history. It is the concept by which not only men, but also the Neteru (gods) themselves were governed. Ma-at is not easily translated or defined by one word. Basically, we might say that it means that which, of right, should be; that which is according to the proper order and harmony of the cosmos and of Neteru and men, who are part of it. Ma-at, The Way, encompasses the virtues, goals, and duties that define the acceptable, if not ideal, social interaction and personal behavior.
Solstice
The word solstice literally means “sun stands still.” At the winter solstice, the sun for the first time will begin to increase both lengthening the amount of daylight and progressing north along the horizon after having reached its most southerly point. For 3 days however, the sun does not visibly appear to move northward along the horizon, thus appearing to “stand still” in its progression. In association, we find the winter solstice celebrated as the birth of the sun on the winter solstice on the 22nd of December (in the northern hemisphere), and the divine savior 3 days later on the 25th of December. Jesus, Horus, Krishna, Mithras, (prominent during the time of the Roman Empire prior to Jesus the Christ) Dionysus, etc., are all said to have been born on the 25th of December. Now you can look each of these “Saviors” up to prove to yourself that this information is accurate and not just the desired projections of this author. Don’t be afraid, look them up!
Each of these deities was known as a savior of mankind, and a beloved and sacred divine child. Each of these deities was associated with the sun, and all of them born at the winter solstice in a miraculous virgin birth. The lives and stories of these deities tells us of a great mystery, which in the case of Jesus, he came to earth with a mission to reveal both in the events of his life and his teachings.
The Galactic Year
The Ancient Egyptians had to have gone through at least one complete zodiac cycle of 25,920 year cycle. It is evident from the numerous Ancient Egyptian astronomical records showing observations of the perimeter stars of the various constellations that they have to had seen it at least once before. Since the constellations are so large, one can only see a portion of a constellation during a lifetime because the earth takes 2160 years to traverse a zodiac sign and someone or a group of people had to have observed this. The Ancient Egyptians 5,000 years ago knew in advance the 12 zodiac constellations, in other words they went through a complete zodiac cycle of 25,920 years already. The attempts to shape time through using the Bible to say that the earth is only 6 thousand years old are just an attempt to use the “Jedi mind trick.”
As a result of those facts, the Ancient Egyptian history has to have extended to a complete zodiac cycle of 25,920 years and then some. Consequently, the antiquity of Ancient Egypt is [25,920 + (10,948-148)] = 36,720 years old. The Ancient Egyptian civilization is over 36,000 years old and by extension of those facts and ideas, life on Earth is at least that old and goes against Christian and western establishments of time and the age of the Earth. Both establishments have predetermined that life on earth is about 5,000 years old.
You never have to feel that you are inferior by any measure of history if you are an African American. You need not accept the negative images thrust upon you through language, imagery or false portrayals of you in history. Hold your head up high and know that you come from a majestic people with a glorious history that is unparalleled in human history and has never been duplicated anywhere at any time.
The Pentateuch (Back to the Bible)
Now a few of these observations about the Bible may be disturbing to some; however you cannot let this historical information disturb your relationship with the almighty, period! The most recent ideas on the origin of the five books place Deuteronomy in the late 7th century BC., with a revised version in the 6th, and the other four books in the Persian period of the 5th century BC. The consensus among biblical scholars today is that there was never any exodus of the proportions described in the Bible, and that the story is best seen as theology, a story illustrating how the god of Israel acted to save and strengthen his chosen people, and not as history. Nevertheless, the discussion of the historical reality of the exodus has a long history, and continues to attract attention to this day.
In the book of Exodus 12:37-38 the Israelites numbered “about six hundred thousand men on foot, besides women and children.” Also in that group many non-Israelites and livestock who left Egypt. Numbers 1:46 gives a more precise total of 603,550. The 600,000, plus wives, children, the elderly, and the “mixed multitude” of non-Israelites would have numbered some 2 million people, compared with an entire Egyptian population in 1250 BC of around 3 to 3.5 million. Marching ten abreast, and without accounting for livestock, they would have formed a line 150 miles long.
No evidence has been found that indicates Egypt ever suffered such a demographic and economic catastrophe or that the Sinai desert ever hosted or could have hosted these millions of people and their herds. It is hard to believe that 600,000 Hebrew families, which would mean about two million people, crossed the entire Sinai without leaving one shard of pottery which is the archeologist’s best friend, with Hebrew writing on it. Some scholars have rationalized these numbers into smaller figures, for example reading the Hebrew as “600 families” rather than 600,000 men, but all such solutions raise more problems than they solve. The view of mainstream modern biblical scholarship is that the improbability of the Exodus story originates because it was written not as history, but to demonstrate God’s purpose and deeds with his chosen people, Israel.
No archaeological evidence is found to support the idea that there were a group of people who wandered in the wilderness for 40 years, no pottery, not one location, not one piece of evidence. The biblical Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses and Joshua are not mentioned in any non biblical records. Nor is there any reference to an Israelite soldier and or stay in Egypt the Exodus or the conquest of Palestine in any ancient source contemporary with the time when these events are said to have occurred.
It is remarkable that Egyptian records make no mention of the sudden migration of what would have been nearly a quarter of their population, nor has any evidence been found for any of the expected effects of such an exodus; such as economic downturn or labor shortages. In dispute of the exodus story, historically Egypt reached new heights of imperial splendor and prosperity during the New Kingdom (18th—19th dynasties). Tutmosis III campaigned beyond the Euphrates and reached the Fourth Cataract on the Nile; Ramses II halted the advance of the Hittites in Syria and built more temples and monuments than anyone. There was no economic downturn in Egypt which would have certainly been the case if the Exodus story were true.
A century of research by archaeologists and Egyptologists has found no evidence which can be directly related to the Exodus captivity and travels through the wilderness. Most archaeologists have abandoned the archaeological investigation of Moses and the Exodus as “a fruitless pursuit.” The reality is that there is no evidence whatsoever that the Jews or more correctly Hebrews, were ever enslaved in Egypt. Yes, there’s the story contained within the bible itself, but that’s not a remotely historically admissible source. I’m talking about real proof; archeological evidence, Kemetic/Egyptian records and primary sources. Of these, nothing exists.
Archaeological data that indicated that events described in the Bible as happening within a particular time frame couldn’t have occurred at the time indicated. Several of these stories describe Israel’s destruction of enemy cities during the campaigns into the crossing of the Jordan River and entry into Canaan. The archaeological evidence shows that many of those cities didn’t exist at that time. And yet, a conscious and deliberate effort exists to keep the two spheres, belief and facts separate, yet the Bible clearly shows a long and continuous relationship between ancient Israel and Egypt. It places Israel’s formative years in Egypt, living an Egyptian lifestyle, educated in Egyptian ideas, and dwelling there for centuries before the Exodus. Acts 7:22 And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds.
In the past 2000 years, Christianity has been guilty of initiating several wars and crusades resulting in thousands of needless deaths, blatantly oppressing women to the point of worthlessness, abhorrently justifying the enslavement of Africans and perpetuating cruelties upon them we would rather just forget, shamelessly driving its followers to hang or burn alleged witches, nearly exterminating the entire Native American population, and robbing billions of people of national treasure that could have been much better spent on improving our planet.
The Pope’s Apology
Saving one of his most audacious initiatives for the twilight of his papacy, John Paul II yesterday attempted to purify the soul of the Roman Catholic Church by making a sweeping apology for 2,000 years of violence, persecution and blunders.”
“From the altar of St Peter’s Basilica in Rome he led Catholicism into unchartered territory by seeking forgiveness for sins committed against Jews, heretics, women, Gypsies and native peoples.”
Quotes from Rory Carroll in Rome The Guardian, Monday 13 March 2000 06.37 EST
Pope John Paul II as Pope officially made public apologies for over 100 of these wrongdoings of torture, conquest, oppression and genocide. He spent a lot of time apologizing to the natives of Middle and South America but he did not give back any of the treasure and gold!
The Pentateuch
(Back to the Bible) Continues
In view of history outside the Bible, many Christians, me included at one time, don’t even know what they believe inside the Bible because they never take the time to read and study the whole Bible outside of the doctrinal preaching and teaching of their own religion. I most certainty am guilty of this behavior for years. Because of this shockingly lazy choice exercised by the vast majority of Christians, they’re mentally unequipped to answer challenges to their belief system. As a result, the common response to presented complications is usually this: “The Bible says it. I believe it. That settles it.” As a matter of fact, anyone can claim they have been “called” by God and begin their journey to the Pulpit to inform the public with no education what so ever. I have seen Pastors who could not read at all but could “hoop.”
Many people do not see the Bible as a book of spiritual principles. Rather, they insist that it is to be believed word for word. It is important to know who has produced the book and if they have or had any ulterior motives or hidden agendas in their work. Many people feel that when they pick up a Bible, they are holding the “Word of God.” This idea has been engrained in the minds of many people for so many years that most do not question the contents of the Bible they are reading, and even become hostile when their illusions are challenged. Since there is no evidence to support the events given in the Bible, except the Bible itself, it cannot be treated as a history text.
If you’ve taken the time to read the Old Testament in its entirety, you’ve probably noticed that God was portrayed as a God who is consistently angry and vengeful for what appear to be petty reasons. How objective can one honestly remain while analyzing evidence that’s contrary to the belief system in which an enormous emotional investment has already been made? If you undertake an honest, dispassionate, and emotionless analysis of the Bible, you can easily conclude that it’s not the word of a supreme being but the words of men. And, if you know the almighty yourself through your own experience this should not shake your faith in Him.
In the New Testament if people choose not to accept Jesus before they die, then a trip to Hell awaits everybody. But, we must not forget about the ultimate reward for accepting Jesus is an eternal stay in Heaven with infinite happiness. How many impressionable young children, including you and I could possibly refuse this “genuine” offer? At a very tender age this practice usually begins, children typically aren’t able to rationalize these biblical assertions or challenge their legitimacy. Add to that the parental pressures to conform to the families beliefs. This weekly process of preaching and teaching pounds the urgent method into their heads day after day, week after week, month after month, and year after year. By the time you are a teenager; most Christians couldn’t possibly consider or contemplate the presence of an error in the Bible because it’s unquestionably the perfect word of God to them. They believe this notion because they are lifelong members of a society that has continually reinforced the “special” nature of Christianity. Needless to say, every religion is “special” in its own isolated environment of observance.
When contrasting information meet the conditioned beliefs, cognitive dissonance takes over and represses such information or irrationally justifies the discrepancies in a manner that allows the confronted people to forget them. For centuries, this psychological phenomenon has prevented people from accepting rational conclusions about Christianity. Christians will often make arguments that imply something is true because society has generally accepted it as the truth for a lengthy but arbitrary period of time.
“The Bible is the word of God. Since God wrote the Bible, we know that it contains only truthful accounts. Since the truthful accounts are inspired by God, we know that the Bible is God’s word.” In other words, the Bible is the word of God because the Bible says so. Now don’t get me wrong. I believe that the Bible is inspired in places and you can be inspired to seek God on your own through its stories, but I have stopped believing that the history in it is correct. There are just too many facts that disprove that the Bible is without error.
It was also known that the early councils of the Roman councils of the Roman Catholic Bishops had altered, edited and even omitted from the Bible, many existing scriptures of the time claimed to be inspired by Jesus. By the time the Roman Catholic Church had compiled and canonized the scriptures which would make up the present day Christian Bible, these works had undergone many revisions and changes.
The fall of the Roman Empire in 476 AD ushered in nearly a thousand years of intellectual and spiritual darkness in Europe known as the Dark Ages. The Roman Catholic Church became the only unifying force in Europe. Europe began to emerge from its deep slumber and experienced a renaissance. The Renaissance, was largely brought about by the revival of ancient Egyptian knowledge with the discovery of the “lost books of Hermes Trismegistus” known to academics as the Hermetic texts and the knowledge that the Moors gave them. While this information is available in books, it is not known by the general public especially most Christian denominations.
These mysterious texts were considered to be from the hand of ancient Egypt’s god of wisdom and science, Thoth, whom the Greeks called Hermes Trismegistus, or Hermes-Thrice-Great. Written in Greek in the city of Alexandria, probably in the first century CE, their contents were almost certainly gathered from much older genuine ancient Egyptian temple literature, which the Pharaohs referred to as the Sacred Books of Thoth. No matter who wrote the information, in the final analysis, some man or group of men wrote the original words and the influence and origin of these ideas were definitely African.
The church father Clement of Alexandria, in the sixth book of his work Stomata, mentions forty-two books used by Egyptian priests that he says contain “the whole philosophy of the Egyptians”. All these books, according to Clement, were written by Hermes (the Greek name for Thoth). Among the subjects they cover are hymns, rituals, temple construction, astrology, geography, and medicine. After the systematic persecution and destruction of these kinds of ancient ideas which began in Egypt in the fifth century AD, they mysteriously disappeared from circulation.
This intellectual surprise exploded in Europe, which would clear the way for the emergence of all branches of scientific knowledge and the arts and lead Europe’s stagnant civilization toward the Age of Enlightenment and, as some even claim, the industrial revolution and the emergence of the modern Western world. European scholars now became aware of how many of the Greek geniuses, among them Pythagoras, Archimedes, and even the great Plato had gone to Egypt to learn from the Egyptian priestly masters and returned to Greece enriched by their experiences and learning in the deep and advanced knowledge of the Egyptians. So, in the face of this knowledge, why were you not taught this in school? It is simple. The allusion of being the Mothers, Fathers, Masters and inventors of all things intelligent would be removed from the social philosophy and you might grow up knowing your own greatness. In Ancient Egyptian times there was a communal approach to life, and a very stable society. Everyone had their place, their tasks, and co-operated with others to ensure survival, peace and prosperity. How is it we do not act this way today? Have we been programmed to act differently than our ancestors? How have we lost our way?
Important books newly discovered on ancient Egypt became available to Europeans generated a deep interest in the mysteries of Egypt. The “Hermetica” are Egyptian writings in origin, translated into Greek wisdom texts mostly presented as dialogues in which a teacher, generally identified with Hermes Trismegistus or “thrice-greatest Hermes”, enlightens a disciple. The texts discuss the nature of the divine, mind, nature and the cosmos: some touch upon alchemy, astrology and related concepts.
Soon after the introduction of the Hermetica in Europe, the Polish astronomer Nicolas Copernicus (1473-1543), inspired by the contents of these sacred books from Egypt’s golden age, formulated a comprehensive view with the sun at the center of cosmology, not Earth in the center of the planetary system as claimed by the Church. He then published his celebrated thesis on the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres, widely regarded as the most defining moment in scientific research. The geocentric model accepted by the Catholic Church declared that the Earth was flat and was at the center of the universe, period. Copernicus, however, was the first scientist to challenge this erroneous view. This was an act that in those days was considered heresy and punishable by death. And although Copernicus’s knowledge of mathematics was largely derived from Arabic sources, the now legendary Sun centered model that he proposed was almost certainly inspired by the ancient Egyptian notion of a divine sun being at the center of all things. So the more we look at Kemet the more we see that the Western World view is derived from the earlier research, writing and observations from Africa!
Because the Assyrians from the Middle East seized Egypt from Kush in 663 BC., from that date until today, Egypt has never been free of foreign control. After being ruled by the Assyrians, Egypt was colonized by the Persians, then the Greeks, the Romans and finally, the Arabs. This is why the modern Egyptians are no longer Africans nor do they look like the original people of Kemet. They are a mixture of the various peoples that have occupied Egypt. We should remember that the modern people of Egypt are not the same people as the Ancient Egyptians. The modern Arab Egyptians conquered Egypt from Arabia in early medieval times. They have continued to rule North Africa right up to the present time. And today we have the Muslim Brotherhood who rule in Egypt and are consolidating power as this is written.
The Names of God
I want to present these names of God that are in the books of the Bible. Do you have any problem with any of these names? You accept them as names of God, don’t you? Let me explore some ideas with you. Why do we use the word God to refer to the almighty? When you go to Seminary to study God it’s called Theology, why? It is because Theos is the Greek word for God and that reference to God’s name is still used. Why is that the case and what is the point? The reason we use the name God instead of Theos is because the Goths or Germans overran the Roman Empire and the word is a German word. So today it is normal to use the word God. So as you look at the Bible and consider the names of God, his name changes according to what culture and language is considering naming the almighty. The Indians of North America called God the Great Spirit. Is that any less accurate? The people who told you that God said his name is Jehovah were Jewish. Is God Jewish? The Hebrew people themselves had several names for God. Were they confused? Was God confused about his own name? How did they figure out that God wanted to be called Jehovah? Or was it Elohim or El or what? Or, did you get convinced that what they wrote was converted into “the Word of God?” Boy! How can you question that?
The idea of God became constrained by Hebrew and Christian doctrine, which was the exclusive property belonging to certain “chosen people.” Thus, they saw all other Gods as idols or devils. All other religions were seen as heresies. Consequently, the followers of those forms of religion were considered as pagans who must be subdued and converted or destroyed.
God, is expressed by Christians based on Hebrew, Jewish and Greek culture and traditions taken from Egypt. The same ultimate reality is expressed by Muslims based on Arab culture and traditions. The same ultimate and transcendental reality is worshipped by Jews based on Hebrew culture and traditions. There will always be differences between faiths, each one claiming they are the right one.
Wait a minute! In the New Testament we have Jesus. Well if that is the only name by which you can be saved, what are you going to do when you get ready to enter heaven and a booming deep voice says, “My sons name is Yeshua?” I asked a Christian that question and he said God knows what you mean. Well, yes and he knows what you mean coming from any language if it is from the heart.
The English name Jesus derives from the Late Latin name Iesus. Both the full form Yehoshua and the abbreviated form were in use during the Gospel period—and in relation to the same person, as in the Hebrew Bible references to Yehoshua/ son of Nun, and Yehoshua/ the high priest in the days of Ezra. Aramaic references to the Hebrew Bible had long used for Hebrew names. So the possibility of Jesus having been Yehoshua remains. My point being, how can one name or set of syllables represent the almighty or be a magic key to get into heaven?
Words and philosophical discourse can only point the way to the truth. In order to discover the truth we must go beyond all words, all thoughts, and all of our mental concepts and philosophies because the truth, can only be experienced; it cannot be encapsulated in any way, shape or form.
Most people would say that God knows what you are talking about when you call on him and that is precisely my point. You find God with your heart and not with one word.
“EL” is another name used for God in the Bible, showing up about 200 times in the Old Testament. El is the simple form arising from Elohim, and is often combined with other words for descriptive emphasis. Some examples:
Elohim… . Genesis 1:1, Psalm 19:1 meaning “God”, a reference to God’s power and might.
ADONAI… . Malachi 1:6 meaning “Lord”, a reference to the Lordship of God.
El HaNe’eman—The Faimithful God: (Deuteronomy 7:9).
El HaGadol—The Great God: (Deuteronomy 10:17).
El HaKadosh—The Holy God: (Isaiah 5:16).
El Yisrael—The God Of Israel: (Psalm 68:35).
El HaShamayim—The God Of The Heavens:
(Psalm 136:26).
El De’ot—The God Of Knowledge: (1 Samuel 2:3).
El Emet—The God Of Truth: (Psalm 31:6).
El Yeshuati—The God Of My Salvation: (Isaiah 12:2).
El Elyon—The Most High God: (Genesis 14:18).
Immanu El—God Is With Us: (Isaiah 7:14).
El Olam—The God Of Eternity (Genesis 21:33).
El Echad—The One God: (Malachi 2:10). “ELAH” is another name for God, used about 70 times in the Old Testament. Again, when combined with other words, we see different attributes of God. Some examples:
Elah Yerush’lem—God of Jerusalem: (Ezra 7:19).
Elah Yisrael—God of Israel: (Ezra 5:1).
Elah Sh’maya—God of Heaven: (Ezra 7:23).
Elah Sh’maya V’Arah—God of Heaven and Earth:
(Ezra 5:11).
JEHOVAH—YAHWEH… . Genesis 2:4 a reference to God’s divine salvation.
JEHOVAH-MACCADDESHEM… .
Exodus 31:13 meaning “The Lord thy sanctifier”
JEHOVAH-ROHI… . Psalm 23:1 meaning
“The Lord my shepherd”
JEHOVAH-SHAMMAH… . Ezekiel 48:35 meaning
“The Lord who is present”
JEHOVAH-RAPHA… . Exodus 15:26 meaning
“The Lord our healer”
JEHOVAH-TSIDKENU… . Jeremiah 23:6 meaning
“The Lord our righteousness”
JEHOVAH-JIREH… . Genesis 22:13-14 meaning
“The Lord will provide”
JEHOVAH-NISSI… . Exodus 17:15 meaning
“The Lord our banner”
JEHOVAH-SHALOM… . Judges 6:24 meaning
“The Lord is peace”
JEHOVAH-SABBAOTH… . Isaiah 6:1-3 meaning
“The Lord of Hosts”
JEHOVAH-GMOLAH… . Jeremiah 51:6 meaning
“The God of Recompense”
Advocate—1 John 2:1 Almighty—Revelation 1:8 Alpha—Revelation 1:8 Amen—Revelation 3:14 Angel of the Lord—Genesis 16:7 Anointed One—Psalm 2:2 Apostle—Hebrews 3:1 Author of our Faith—Hebrews 12:2 Beginning—Revelation 21:6 Bishop of Souls—1 Peter 2:25 Branch—Zechariah 3:8 Bread of Life—John 6:35,48 Bridegroom—Matthew 9:15 Carpenter—Mark 6:3 Chief Shepherd—1 Peter 5:4 The Christ—Matthew 1:16 Comforter—Jeremiah 8:18 Consolation of Israel—Luke 2:25 Cornerstone—Ephesians 2:20 Dayspring—Luke 1:78 Day Star—2 Peter 1:19 Deliverer—Romans 11:26 Desire of Nations—Haggai 2:7 Emmanuel—Matthew 1:23 End—Revelation 21:6 Everlasting Father—Isaiah 9:6 Faithful and True Witness—Revelation 3:14 First Fruits—1 Corinthians 15:23 Foundation—Isaiah 28:16 Fountain—Zechariah 13:1 Friend of Sinners—Matthew 11:19 Gate for the Sheep—John 10:7 Gift of God—2 Corinthians 9:15 God—John 1:1 Glory of God—Isaiah 60:1 Good Shepherd—John 10:11 Governor—Matthew 2:6 Great Shepherd—Hebrews 13:20 Guide—Psalm 48:14 Head of the Church—Colossians 1:18 High Priest—Hebrews 3:1 Holy One of Israel—Isaiah 41:14 Horn of Salvation—Luke 1:69 I Am—Exodus 3:14 Jehovah—Psalm 83:18 Jesus—Matthew 1:21 King of Israel—Matthew 27:42 King of Kings—1 Timothy 6:15; Revelation 19:16 Lamb of God—John 1:29 Last Adam—1 Corinthians 15:45 Life—John 11:25 Light of the World—John 8:12; John 9:5 Lion of the Tribe of Judah—Revelation 5:5 Lord of Lords 1 Timothy 6:15; Revelation 19:16 Master—Matthew 23:8 Mediator—1 Timothy 2:5 Messiah—John 1:41 Mighty God—Isaiah 9:6 Morning Star—Revelation 22:16 Nazarene—Matthew 2:23 Omega—Revelation 1:8 Passover Lamb—1 Corinthians 5:7 Physician—Matthew 9:12 Potentate—1 Timothy 6:15 Priest—Hebrews 4:15 Prince of Peace—Isaiah 9:6 Prophet—Acts 3:22 Propitiation—I John 2:2 Purifier—Malachi 3:3 Rabbi—John 1:49 Ransom—1 Timothy 2:6 Redeemer—Isaiah 41:14 Refiner—Malachi 3:2 Refuge—Isaiah 25:4 Resurrection—John 11:25 Righteousness—Jeremiah 23:6 Rock—Deuteronomy 32:4 Root of David—Revelation 22:16 Rose of Sharon—Song of Solomon 2:1 Ruler of God’s Creation—Revelation 3:14 Sacrifice—Ephesians 5:2 Savior—2 Samuel 22:47; Luke 1:47 Second Adam—1 Corinthians 15:47 Seed of Abraham—Galatians 3:16 Seed of David—2 Timothy 2:8 Seed of the Woman—Genesis 3:15 Servant—Isaiah 42:1 Shepherd—1 Peter 2:25 Shiloh—Genesis 49:10 Son of David—Matthew 15:22 Son of God—Luke 1:35 Son of Man—Matthew 18:11 Son of Mary—Mark 6:3 Son of the Most High—Luke 1:32 Stone—Isaiah 28:16 Sun of Righteousness—Malachi 4:2 Teacher—Matthew 26:18 Truth—John 14:6 Way—John 14:6 Wonderful Counselor—Isaiah 9:6 Word—John 1:1 Vine—John 15:1
Did you have any problems with all those names? Now, let me be blunt and just say this; when you read the Bible and it speaks of Egypt, first of all the name has been changed by Greeks. As stated before, the real name is Kemet, land of the Blacks. So, what you have is someone of another or different culture, or a group of foreigners talking about your Black culture. The Hebrew writers are giving you a view of your Black history through the eyes of themselves and over time convincing you that God wrote that. Now you did not have any problems looking at all the words you just saw from the Bible because you are comfortable with that being “God” speaking. Consider this: if all those names you looked at had pictures associated with them to visually help you understand the various powers and aspects of God, would that constitute poly-theism? Or, do you think the Bible is full of many Gods or just one God? No, it is one creator expressed in many ways. If someone calls me James, Jimmy, Reverend Lamb or hey you, I know they are talking to me. I do not have a multi-personality disorder; I have many names that refer to me and other descriptions of what I am to be clear to you more of what I am. A person, who is an engineer, a father, and a husband, does not have poly-personalities, but rather a mono-personality with multiple functions and attributes, just like the almighty.
The eventual goal of our human experience is to everlastingly reconnect with our divine essence; to awaken to the supreme consciousness of true love. This is the true purpose and meaning of the word Religion; to reconnect with the Divine through the relationship to the sacred or supernatural. There are many religions, such as Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, and Judaism. In the case of Buddhism you are taught through perception of the true nature of reality in meditation and contemplation. Broadly speaking, some religions like Judaism, Christianity, and Islam are outwardly focused, and others like Buddhism are inwardly focused. In all religions there are usually small groups that are esoteric and dedicated to experiencing the divine in personal ways that are not outward religious practices; the Lords supper, baptism etc. Religions have been used to enslave many but spirituality; true divine essence frees the spirit. Be not deceived by the distortions that have occurred to the scriptural teachings, because whatever you read was written by men. Your experience with the divine is the truth and that takes time to cultivate. Focus on finding the truth; what truth; the truth that comes only with spending time with your divine self inside your temple.
The development of Christian beliefs in the West was predominately dependent upon three things; Rome’s desire for a new powerful centralized moral code and its ability to spread such views. Secondly, in having a religion that was dominant and a different belief system from that of the Eastern religions. And thirdly, its ability to maintain itself as a separate religion in isolation from other world religions of the time which would result in greater centralized power for Rome. Once the religious society met these requirements, the continuance of the religion was entirely reliant upon the zeal of its individual followers with the power of Rome behind it. For example, even today parents who unintentionally condition their children to reject logic and reason when confronted with controversial extra Biblical evidence that indicates that the Bible is not, “the Word of God,” but in truth are a collection of writings from many sources including myths and stories from other religions but the parents will not accept that.
However, Christian beliefs and writings backed up by schools, seminaries, religious universities, books and other media teach us that things in the bible are unquestionably true in spite of opposing information. Such irrational ideas begin at an age at which we have yet to behave or think in a rational manner and cannot think for ourselves. The same ideas are also continuously reinforced in an isolated Christian environment through Churches, schools of Christian thought and every form of media imaginable until cognitive dissonance takes over and renders common sense powerless and we “believe” our religion is the only true religion.
The idea of a complete and precise canon of the New Testament existing from the beginning of apostolic times has absolutely no foundation in history. The Canon of the New Testament, like that of the Old, is the result of a development over time. In 331, Constantine I commissioned Eusebius to deliver fifty Bibles for the Church of Constantinople as a result Alexandrian scribes, (the number at around 340) began preparing Bibles for Constantine beyond that little else is known.
Many see the Bible as God’s Word and a book that is without error and not wrong about anything important. It was dictated or inspired by God in every word; however upon further examination religions have three aspects, myth, ritual and mysticism or spirituality. Myths and stories show us our heritage as a culture as well as the legacy we are to receive. This is why it is so vitally important to know your own story as African Americans. Never forget that when you are reading the Bible you are reading ancient myths and stories from Kemet that have been imprinted with Hebrew, Greek and Roman cultural ideas.
Myth and ritual relate to the folk expression of religion, whereas mysticism relates to that movement of self-discovery that transcends all worldly concepts. Mysticism allows any person in any religion to discover that the same Supreme Being is being worshipped by all under different names and forms, and by different means. It is the worship itself and the object of that worship that underlies the human movement. Therefore, the task of all true mystics and spiritual seekers is to go beyond the veil of the outer forms of religion, including the symbols, but more importantly, the doctrines, rituals and traditions.
The purpose of religion is to bring a human being closer to the Divine, which is peace, harmony, abiding happiness and self-knowledge. The culture and myth stories, showing how the folk expression of religion is based on culture and local traditions is extremely important. Culture and myth should lead to the strengthening and transformation of us, others and our community. If that is not taking place in space and time today than a reevaluation of the religion is in order.
The keeping of rituals in religion relates to the traditions, ceremonies and observances related to the principles presented in the myth. It is understood that people who believe in the myths and stories should practice rituals related to it so that they may be drawn closer to it and thereby understand it better. If this process is successful, a human being is expected to discover the transcendental wisdom that is at the heart of the religion.
Religion has three aspects, myth, ritual and mysticism. Myth and ritual relate to the cultural manifestation of religion, whereas mysticism relates to that movement of self-discovery that transcends all worldly concepts. Spirituality and true mystic evolution allows any person in any religion to discover that the same Supreme Being is being worshipped by all under different names and forms, and by different means of religious forms. It is the worship itself and the object of that worship that underlies the human movement. Therefore, the task of all true mystics and spiritual seekers is to go beyond the veil of the outer forms of religion, including the symbols, but more importantly, the doctrines, rituals and traditions. From time immemorial, human beings have devised stories and behavior as well as methods of inquiry to explain and understand the nature of life, its source and ultimate destiny. The stories used by sages and saints to explain the nature of Creation and our place in it are collectively called myths.
Myths both religious and mystical along with religious stories and events are applicable to our lives in the present. I once brought up the idea in Bible class of we as Black people using our own history as a point of departure to understand our own greatness and spiritual ideas. One lady said you mean go back to the past to help us now, well that will not work. Yet we just got through looking at some scriptures from Genesis for over an hour to explain some spiritual ideas for today. Just thought I would throw that in because when it comes to something Black, well you know.
The first and most important key to understanding a myth is that the myth is not talking about some ancient personality or story which occurred a long time ago and which has no relevance to the present. In fact, the myth is speaking about you. For example the story of Jesus is the story of you and your possible spiritual development. It is a story about human life, its beginning, its destiny, its difficulty and the right action, in the present. While based on the same principles of the past, those myths and stories pave the way to enlightenment and true happiness in the present. If people who practice religion stay at the outer levels basing their religious practice and wisdom on their culture, myths and traditions, they will always see differences between faiths. All religions should have a right to exist in an atmosphere of understanding and tolerance, just as human beings in a family, with differing desires, personalities and tendencies need to accept, cooperate, recognize, and even appreciate each other, or a florist appreciates how different flowers augment a bouquet.
Myths and stories are a journey of spiritual transformation. By understanding a myth and comprehending that it is usually written in the form of a journey in which the subject must learn about him or herself and be able transcend the ordinary human consciousness, thereby discovering a greater essence of self. In this journey there are experiences of joy, grief, great effort and education. It is a movement from ignorance, (not knowing) and darkness towards light, wisdom and ultimately, to spiritual enlightenment. That is the story of my life and the continued beauty of enlightenment still continues today.
Myths give human beings a place in the scheme of things as well as a purpose in life and the means to achieve the fulfillment of that purpose. Some people have come to regard the term myth as meaning a created fiction. Actually, the idea behind creating religious myths is that they should contain transcendental truths that cannot be conveyed rationally. Myth points the way to victory in life. The ultimate purpose of these myths and stories is to achieve victory in the battle of life, to defeat the forces of ignorance within oneself and thereby become masters of life here and hereafter, discovering the peace, love and joy of God and true enlightenment.
When you begin to see the similarities in the myths and stories in the sacred writings of others you begin to understand that those myths and stories are to be lived in order to appreciate and understand their true meaning. Understanding a myth is that comprehension that comes from living the myth. Living a myth does not mean simply reading a myth. Nor does it mean being able to recount the events with perfect memory. And while we grow up in Church doing this it does not mean simply practicing the rituals of a myth without a deeper understanding of their implications and purpose that we are growing spiritually. It means taking the real meaning of the teaching being transmitted through the myth a fundamental part of your life.
If this practice is not implemented, the teachings remain at the intellectual level and the deeper truths of the myth are not revealed. This is why it is so important for you to understand; you must go inside your own temple to understand the essence of who and what you are. Otherwise, you live with dry, spiritless, intellectualism or a blind faith, the former leading to an external and therefore frustrating spiritual life, and the second leading to rigidity and emotional frustration while still thinking you know. Therefore, you must resolve to discover the lessons of the myth in every facet of your life, and in doing so, you will be victorious as the hero or heroine of the myth and the unfolding beauty of discovery in the blossoming of your own life.
Culture is everything a human being learns from living in a society including language, history, values and religion, etc. However, the outer learning masks an inner experience. Spirituality is that movement to transcend culture and discover the essence of humanity. This Ultimate Truth, known by many names, such as God, Goddess, Supreme Being, and their varied names in all of the world’s cultures, is revered by all peoples, though culture and folk differences color the expression of that reverence. This is what is called the folk expression of religion based on culture and local traditions. For example, the same Ultimate Reality is expressed by Christians based on European culture and traditions, as God. The same Ultimate Reality is expressed by Muslims based on Arab culture and traditions as Allah. The same Ultimate and Transcendental Reality is worshipped by Jews based on Hebrew culture and traditions. The same Ultimate and Transcendental Reality is worshipped by the Chinese based on Chinese culture and traditions, etc.
Man comes into the world with the higher divine faculties, which are the essence of his or her salvation, in an unawakened state. The way of the Kemetic/Egyptian religion is, therefore, a system of practices aimed at awakening the dormant higher faculties. The faculty awakening emphasis of the Egyptian religion cannot be over stressed. Moral behavior, for example, does not come about from merely learning certain values, but is gained by both the mind and acquired by spiritual experience. Inner purification must be completed by practicing good social behavior daily in life. Every action impresses itself upon the heart. The inward being of a person is really the reflection of his deeds and actions. Doing good deeds establishes good inner qualities; the virtues impressed upon the heart in turn govern the actions of the body. As each act, thought, and deed makes an image on the heart, it becomes an attribute of the person and behavior produces the kinds of positive consequences sought after from a Godly source and God is present in the individual and community. This maturation of the soul through acquired attributes leads to progressive mystical visions and the ultimate unification with the Divine and unlimited positive spiritual creations of all types. The Ancient Egyptian wisdom has always laid great emphasis on the cultivation of ethical behavior and service to society which we as a community so desperately need today. The Egyptian traditions and practices emphasize character building, good behavior, family values, desirability and benefits of marriage, harmonic relationships, societal duties, work ethics, accountability, etc. The Ancient Kemetic/Egyptian religion is not a matter of creed and dogma, but rather of a personal bond with the divine in you and in others. Each one of us is an individual. The Egyptian model recognizes the uniqueness of each individual, and as such recognizes that the paths to God are as numerous as the number of seekers. The ways to God are like streams and tributaries; they all flow to one source.
Ancient Kemetic/Egypt was the first and most ancient civilization to create a religious system that was complete with all three stages of religion, as well as an advanced spiritual philosophy of righteousness, called Ma’at philosophy, that also had secular/social dimensions. Several Temple systems were developed in Kemet; they were all related. The pre-Judaic/Islamic religions that the later Jewish and Muslim religions drew from in order to create their religions developed out of these Kemetic/Egyptian roots, ironically enough, only to later deny the source from whence they originated.
As a tribute and visual expression of higher consciousness, the Great Sphinx remains the oldest known religious monument in history that denotes high culture and civilization as well. Ancient Egypt and Nubia produced the oldest religious systems and their contact with the rest of the world led to the proliferation of advanced religion and spiritual philosophy and they do not receive the credit they deserve.
Ordinary religion throughout time has been a part of the world and the mental concepts of people, and must too be ultimately transcended. The myth and the stories now becomes the experience of the practitioner as you see and experience the reality of the underlining spiritual laws and principles and finally the journey of religion ends in a mystical experience of the divine with the practitioner also called the initiate, aspirant or devotee. So a mystical teaching of higher consciousness, while existing in an historical context, is in reality not concerned with history or ordinary human reality, since these are, in the end, transient, illusory and irrelevant to the attainment of higher consciousness. Therefore, while certain historical information is needed to set a cultural context for spiritual studies in relation to world history, an emphasis is placed on revealing the mystical meaning contained in it, because it is this meaning alone that will lead the spiritual aspirant to attain the goal of mysticism and true spirituality which is, that of transcending ordinary human consciousness and discovering the deeper realities that lie within the heart.
Africans in the Western Hemisphere before Columbus
Dr. Alexander Von Wuthenau writing, in his book The Art of Terracotta in Pre-Columbian South and Central America, states, “It is in contradiction to the most elementary logic and to all artistic experience that an Indian could depict in a masterly way the head of a negro without missing a single racial characteristic, unless he had actually seen such a person. The type of people depicted must have lived in America… The Negroid element is well proven by the large Olmec stone monuments as well as the terracotta items and therefore cannot be excluded from the pre-Columbian history of America.” If history were written truthfully you would learn, for example, that Africa seems to have had a strong and enduring influence on Olmec culture. And that it peaked during the same period that Black Egyptian culture ascended in Africa. The first African clay masks, pyramids, mummies, stelae and hieroglyphs found in America were also from this era. In 1939, Dr. Matthew Sterling led a joint team from the National Geographic Society into the Gulf of Mexico to spearhead a major digging operation in Vera Cruz to unearth the monolith heads. Sterling concluded: “The features are bold and amazingly Negroid in character.” The archeological and cultural data overwhelmingly confirms the depiction of Negroid faces.
A history book by Paul Alfred Barton titled “A History of the African-Olmecs—Black Civilizations of America from Prehistoric Times to the Present Era” states that: It is very likely that the very first inhabitants of the Americas were Negritic Blacks from Africa and Asia, who arrived in the Americas earlier than 100,000 years Before Christ. This occurrence would have taken place during a period in human history when the only Homo sapiens were Negritic Blacks, and recent migrants from Africa, who entered into an uninhabited North and South America.
Art-work also serves as evidence of Africans in America before Columbus. For years the late art historian, Alexander Von Wuthenau, collected ancient clay figurines that provide clues regarding the diversity of America’s pre-Columbian population. His remarkable African collection depicts priests, chiefs, dancers, wrestlers, drummers, beautiful women and stately men—a collage of Black people who occupied every stratum of society from Mexico to South America.
If you want proof that Black People traveled the world spreading knowledge you should view, The Revelation of the Pyramids, on You Tube: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EYhpzJ_rYrw Just put the address in your search engine and see for yourself. When Blacks traveled the world it was in peace with the purpose of sharing knowledge. That view is in contrast to the European conquest and in their eyes must remain hidden.
A more truthful account of Africa’s long and crystal-clear influence on ancient American cultures must be known. It is a charade of research that college and university courses on the history of the African experience continue to pay no pay attention to the pre-Columbian influence of Africans on the Americas. Furthermore, it must be acknowledged that the continued instruction to secondary and elementary school children that Columbus “discovered” America serves no enlightened purpose and should be stopped. Personally, I do not think this will happen in the near future.
The careful study of the African Diaspora will give the Black men and women, wherever he or she is, a sense of character and pride in himself, herself, our people and our past. The knowledge of this “hidden” history will enable us to deal more successfully with the present and the future. The implementation of true historical knowledge about the African experience must be the quest for all of us. The attainment of a vision of the African past has been purposefully suppressed. We must recognize the search for truth ultimately will produce the confidence to recognize these academic endeavors as the true scholarship for all of us. One by one, these monuments of distortion, constructed by close minded Europeans posing as scholars, historians, anthropologists, even scientists, are being taken down.
There is ample evidence from anthropology, linguistics and other scientific disciplines to support the view that the ancient Africans used their knowledge of sea currents and other navigation and boat-building skills to cross the Atlantic Ocean. Modern experiments have shown that ancient African boats, including the “dug-out,” could have been made seaworthy enough to cross the vast waters. Boat builders in Central Africa’s Lake Chad constructed a papyrus craft that was sailed from North Africa to Barbados in the eastern Caribbean in 1969. Other similar journeys have shown that small boats can indeed survive the crossing.
The Ra Expeditions, headed by Thor Heyerdahl who attempted to cross the Atlantic Ocean by papyrus boat (1969-1970). Heyerdahl became interested in reed boats and their seagoing properties. The archaeologists’ excavations had uncovered pictures of large reed boats with masts and sails engraved in the buried statues and painted on flagstones in prehistoric houses. It soon became clear to Heyerdahl that not only balsa wood rafts, but also reed boats, with pre-Incan sailors could have carried the earliest South Americans out over the open Pacific Ocean. Other researchers had pointed out the obvious similarity between the old reed boats from Mexico and Peru, and the papyrus boats from the earliest civilizations in Africa and in the Mediterranean region. There can be no room for geographical coincidence that the very period when the Negroid appeared in Mexico that the first pyramid, mummies, and hieroglyphics begin to appear in Meso America as well.
Heyerdahl picked a crew of 7 men from 7 nations and sailed under the flag of the UN. Ra sailed west with the trade winds and the Northern Equatorial Stream. The reed bundles proved to be incredibly buoyant. Despite broken steering oars and poor weather, Ra had sailed 5,000 km in 8 weeks before the loss of bundles on the starboard side made Heyerdahl call off the experiment, just one week before they would have reached Barbados, in the West Indies. This was accomplished despite an error in how the misplacement of the steering mechanism.
The entire crew from the first Ra voyage wanted to repeat the experiment and, with the addition of a representative from yet another nation, Heyerdahl hoisted the sail on Ra II. This boat was only 12 m long, but was structurally far stronger than Ra I. Ra II crossed the Atlantic Ocean and sailed the approximately 6,100 km from Safi in Morocco to Barbados in the West Indies in 57 days. Since this time the experiment had been successful, anthropologists across the entire world had to forget the old dogma that papyrus boats could not have brought cultural impulses from North Africa to Central America in pre-Columbian times. Yet, you would be hard pressed to find any history book in the United States school system that accurately portrays Africans as world travelers.
These African mariners came looking for trade. They brought with them, among other things, plants, animals, cloth, their knowledge of science, technology and the arts. Others may have washed ashore accidentally after being caught in powerful Atlantic currents. In fact, many of the early Black settlements were found along the coast where the divisions of the powerful trans-Atlantic Equatorial Current terminate.
The pre-Christopher Columbus presence of Africans in the Western Hemisphere has been deliberately suppressed to reinforce the racist fiction of African inferiority. The Europeans invented this myth to justify the growing slave trade.
In his book, They Came Before Columbus, Professor Ivan Van Sertima of Rutgers University assembled an extraordinary array of evidence to challenge one of the most persistent of these historical distortions. His arguments are so compelling that very many high-caliber scholars, who have maintained their prejudiced line of history, are bound to fall flat from their pedestal. I believe those in power will continue to find ways to be deceptive.
Dr. Ivan Van Sertima documented abundant evidence in his book, “They Came Before Columbus,” to show that Africans have been crossing the Atlantic to America from around 1,000 B.C.
Among the observable evidences are:
1. A strain of cotton, grown in America that has its origin in Africa. A series of experiments was performed to determine if seeds were transported there by birds, wind or sea. The tests proved, conclusively, that the plants must have been taken there by people.
2. A number of Colossal, stone sculptured, Negro heads were found in Mexico and Central America. These were date back 800 to 700 B.C.
3. Large quantity of Terracotta Pottery found in Mexico and Central America.
The first evidence of a Black presence in the America was given to Columbus by the Indians themselves: they gave concrete proof to the Spanish that they were trading with Black people. “The Indians of this Espanola said there had come to Espanola a Black people who have the tops of their spears made of a metal which they called gua-nin, of which he (Columbus) had sent samples to the Sovereigns to have them assayed, when it was found that of 32 parts, 18 were of gold, 6 of silver and 8 of copper. The origin of the word guanin may be tracked down in the Mande languages of West Africa, through Mandigo, Kabunga, Toronka, Kankanka, Banbara, Mande and Vei.
But signs can be found in the oral traditions of Guinea and other African countries, as well as in the Native American nations—north and south. Documentary traces have also survived in Portuguese and Spanish writings, including the journals of Columbus.
In 1946 the San Lorenzo plateaus, an area in southeastern Vera Cruz huge stone heads were found, all of which again contained African facial features. The Olmec civilization was the first of these civilizations flourishing between 1200 and 400 BC. The first great Olmec Civil-Ceremonial Center was developed at San Lorenzo by 1200 BC. About 900 BC, Olmec and the Mayan civilization set the foundation for other civilizations, to include the Aztecs and the Incas. These civilizations received sufficient transmission to enable them to rise to greatness. The African people have been great travelers, culture carriers, and culture collectors among the people of the world. During all this traveling the African explores never launched a destructive war on the people they met. The two people joined and created a separate culture with its own distinctness, the Olmec civilization. Some of these supporting facts were recent discoveries. All of them are accurate, although some are hard to prove, because of the destruction of documents by European explores.
The Olmec were dark skinned, big lips and wide nosed Africans just as they are portrayed in the stone heads. The step pyramid of the Egyptians closely resembles the step pyramid in America. The Double Crown of Lower and Upper Egypt with the bird and the serpent is also found in Olmec culture with Upper and Lower Egypt being North America and South America. The Mexicans have four calendars. The fourth calendar is identical to the Egyptian calendar. In Mexico, there was found a type of paper made from wood pulp that scientist say can only be found in Egypt.
I have presented you with the facts. Now it is up to you to decide. Was there African presence in the Americas before the arrival of Columbus? If you answered yes then it is obvious to you that Africans played an intricate part in the development of the Olmec Empire, the first civilization in the Americas.
Why would the Indians claimed to have traded with Black people if they had not? Why would their faith and language have so much infusion of West African influence if these people did not have any contact? These might not be sufficient, in themselves, to justify the claims that Africans have been visiting the Americas in pre-Colombian times. But there are witnesses. In 1513 Vasco Nunez de Balboa, another Spanish usurper came upon a group of African war captives in an Indian settlement. He was told that the Blacks lived nearby and were constantly waging wars. A priest, Fray Gregoria Garcia wrote an account of another encounter in a book that was silenced by the inquisition: “Here we found slaves of the lord—Negroes—who were the first our people saw in the Indies.”
Many cultural parallels have emerged that point to the presence of Africans in the Western Hemisphere well before Christopher Columbus accidentally encountered the Americas in 1492. Aside from confirmed sightings, there is also an abundance archeological evidence of an Africa presence in pre-Colombian times. These were in the form of realistic portraitures of Negro-Africans in clay, gold, and stone unearthed in pre-Colombian strata in Central and South America. Moved by this overwhelming evidence, the Society of American Archeology at a conference in 1968, Professor Van Sertima report concluded: “Surely there cannot now be any question but that there were visitors to the New World from the Old in historic or even prehistoric time before 1492.”
In addition, “An overwhelming body of new evidence is now emerging from several disciplines, evidence that could not be verified and interpreted before, in light of the infancy of archeology and the great age of racial and intellectual prejudice,” wrote anthropologist and linguist Ivan Van Sertima.
In 1492 the Native people of Hispaniola, now called Haiti and the Dominican Republic, also gave Columbus proof that they had been trading with Africans proof in the form of spears they called “gua-nin.” The tips were made of gold, silver and copper, as Columbus later discovered. According to linguists, “gua-nin” is rooted in the Mande languages of West Africa. Moreover, metallurgy was first developed on that vast and ancient continent.
Columbus later used this information, along with knowledge gained from Portuguese navigators, to sail the “Guinea Route” in 1498 on his third voyage to the Americas. He landed first on the Caribbean island of Trinidad, spotted the South American mainland and called the region the “New World.”
The historical record suggests that the European invaders first spotted a Black settlement on an island off Cartagena, Colombia. Africans also traded with Brazil and settled in Panama and elsewhere on the mainland.
Much of the evidence of the ancient Blacks in the Americas has been collected by Dr. Alexander von Wuthenau. Dr. von Wuthenau in over 35 years of research has amassed hundreds of photographs and objects of art which document the African existence in the Americas from the Pre-Classic period, down through the Olmec, Maya and Aztec periods. Ecuador was the center of Black colonization in South America. Many of the skulls discovered in Ecuador were of Blacks, virtually all the skulls were of the Africoid and Oceanic types.
Most western scholars until lately have misleadingly maintained that Africa made little significant contribution to the development of world civilization. Greece is praised as the original foundation of world culture, the development of the Arts and Sciences, while the fact that the advance of Greece was powerfully influenced by Africa is ignored. It must be noted that the Greeks did not carry culture and learning to Africa, but found them there.
Generally speaking in the American school system, little of Africa is known except on the issue of the slave trade. More than can be imagined, the legacies of slavery and colonialism have been devastating and demoralizing to the African people, and the effects of these human institutions, such as the education system continue to stay behind. Probably the most painful legacy of European oppression was the systematic Miseducation of Black people in Africa and abroad.
We have been miseducated and indoctrinated away from our true selves by our oppressor so that we do not actually know who we are. We are not consciously aware of our own greatness. Not only that but our response to any discussion of Black subjects in Church, were truth should be told is muted and silent. Indoctrinated by this method of education, which has prevented us from relating effectively with ourselves, we are instead pulled away toward the imitation of the White man/woman and his/her culture, thus killing the man/woman in us.
We watch while Europeans educate their children into greatness using actual lies and exaggerations and when the subject comes up about educating our children with our history, we argue against it with spirit and passion. Believe me I have seen this among people who claim to be “conscious.” If you can see your greatness and do not want to share this information with your, (our) children, something is wrong, real wrong and what boggles my mind is that we will not act on these facts and knowledge. We will argue against it with passion, spirit and our whole mind! Well, if every other culture admires their beginnings and teaches their children and we do not, will not, and argue against our true essence then who and what lives in our mind?
It is this educational mold, forced on Blacks, which renders agreement and unity difficult among African Americans. On the other hand, the White man has provided for himself a horizontal education which allows him to know his own history and get along with other Whites with common goals and purpose with pride. Various difficulties of opinion are demonstrated by Whites, but there is a common foundation for agreement implanted through the same education system while we are present in the same classroom that ignores our accomplishments.
Somewhere in Texas there are groups meeting now to shape the educational process and limit the description of slavery in new history books. The Texas Education Agency is a branch of the state government of Texas in the United States responsible for public education. Texas House Speaker Joe Straus of San Antonio said that the government should “take a look” at the structure of the Board and consider a nonpartisan or appointed board if the elected members are “not getting their job done and they’re not pleasing the Legislature or the citizens, then we ought to take a thorough look at what they are doing.” In 2010, it was said to be “drafting its own version of American history,” including altering school textbooks to remove what it said was a “left leaning bias” and making changes that are said to have “religious and racial overtones.” History had been taught from a Eurocentric point of view, there is no doubt about that.
For example, the proposed curriculum would downplay Thomas Jefferson’s emphasis on the separation of church and state and would include a greater emphasis on the importance of religion to the founding fathers. This, by the way, did not have a problem with slavery. Other changes include downplaying Abraham Lincoln’s role in the civil war and putting more emphasis on the Confederate leader Jefferson Davis, questioning the African American Civil Rights Movement in addition to downplaying Martin Luther King Jr.’s legacy, removing such instances and points of history such as downplaying slavery, putting more emphasis on the states’ rights cause during the Civil War.
The reason is the control of images, content of education you receive, the textbooks you take delivery of, religious teachings and the Bible itself has been controlled for 500 years by Europeans. Very often this point of view obscures African contributions and African reality based on truth.
There have been recent finds which indicate an error in the version of history that has been presented as truth. The powers that be are so reluctant to change their thinking that we need overwhelming evidence, far beyond any reasonable doubt to present a true view of African History. The African presence in the Americas was before the arrival of Columbus, we came not as slaves, but as explorers and traders who helped to build the Olmec civilization is the new understanding carried forward in this book.
The contemporary Black education everywhere including the Church is faced with the problems of overcoming years of miseducation. First, we must realize that we too have been miseducated. And, we also have the job of educating our students to identify and analyze the actions of the oppressor with the goal of contributing to the liberation of African peoples of organized dehumanization.
History, as taught in the Western-dominated world, gives the impression that the first Africans to reach the Americas were brought as slaves, in shackles on slaves-ships. So complete is the Euro-Americans assault on Black people that all military, missionary, scholarship and academic forces are used to paint the picture of the African as an eternal slave of the White man.
While the Europeans practically were still living in undeveloped ways, centuries before Columbus was born, or had stepped into any ship, African sailors, scientists and philosophers had gone to America, had inter-changed and ex-changed experiences, ideas and cultures, had traded and lived among the indigenous peoples there. And yet, across modern history there is no people on earth who was (and still is) more oppressed, subjugated, discriminated, humiliated and massacred like the Black, Brown, Red and African people.
In order to justify their crimes of slavery and colonialism, Europeans have constructed a maze of lies and passed them as historical truth. How else do we explain the Western historians’ intentional misrepresentation of the truth to paint the picture of a Caucasian master and an African slave? Yet, even in the Americas, where evidence now abounds that Black people were respected, even highly thought of, by the indigenous peoples of North, Mid and South America. So complete was the Europeans falsification of history that several people, both Black and White, will be shocked to know that there were historical, archaeological, even botanical evidence of Africans having made contact with the New World in Pre-Colombian times. As usual, Western scholarship popularized the myth that the history of the Indians started with their finding and discovering, by the pirate, and genius of mass-murder, Christopher Columbus.
Black populations have been found in the midst of very different nations, anthropologist Alphonse de Quatrefages wrote. Also, the Charruas of Brazil, the Black Caribees of Saint Vincent in the Gulf of Mexico, the Jamassi of Florida saw some representatives in his passage of the Isthmus of Darien in 1513. And, the Peruvian tradition, for example, records a tale of Black men from the east who penetrated the Andes Mountains before Columbus’ arrival. More recently, Africoid skeletal remains were found in pre-Columbian strata in the Pecos River Valley, which straddles Texas and New Mexico. Negroid skulls and skeletons have also been found throughout the New World. Polish professor Andrzej Wiercinski has revealed the discovery of African skulls at Olmec sites in Tlatilco, Cerro de las Mesas and Monte Alban. Furthermore, very ancient African skeletons have been unearthed in California, Mexico, Central and South America.
The early African presence went beyond the mainland. Not only did the indigenous people of Hispaniola give Columbus proof of their trade with African mariners, in 1975 archeologists unearthed two Africoid skeletons in the Virgin Islands which were carbon dated to A.D.1250.
The best evidence of the Black presence in America before Columbus comes from the pen of the Columbus himself. In his Journal of the Second Voyage, Columbus reported that when he reached Haiti the Native Americans told him that Black-skinned people had come from the south and southeast in boats, trading with gold-tipped medal spears. At least a dozen other European explorers, including Vasco Nunez de Balboa, also reported seeing or hearing of “Negroes” when they reached the New World.
The foremost authority on the African presence in ancient America Ivan Van Sertima, has built a strong case demonstrating that many Olmec cultural traits were of African origin: A study of the Olmec civilization reveals fundamentals that so closely parallel ceremony traits and techniques in the Egyptian and the Nubian world of the same period that it is difficult to maintain that all these are due to mere coincidence. Other scholars believe that Africans introduced a calendar, writing, pyramid and tomb construction, mummification, as well as certain political systems and religious traditions to the native Olmec culture.
The Olmec civilization, which appears to have been of African origin or to have been dominated by Africans, was the Mother Culture of Mexico. Michael Coe, the leading American historian on Mexico, has written that, “There is not the slightest doubt that all later civilizations in Mexico and Central America, rest ultimately on an Olmec base.”
The Olmec taught the Maya architecture and all the related sciences. Furthermore, throughout Maya history, depicted in its monuments and art we see the presence of Africans. The figurines found at the site of Ocos illustrates that the earliest Maya were Africans. Dr. Wiercinski in 1972 claimed that many of the Olmec people were of African origin dispelling many myths of the day. He supports this claim with skeletal evidence from several Olmec sites where he found skeletons that were analogous to the West African type Black. Wiercinski discovered that 13.5 percent of the skeletons from Tlatilco and 4.5 percent of the skeletons from Cerro de las Mesas were Africoid. Constance Irwin and Dr. Wiercinski (1972) have both reported that skeletal remains of Africans have been found in Mexico. Constance Irwin, in Fair Gods and Stone Faces, says that anthropologist see “distinct signs of Negroid ancestry in many a New World skulls.”
The art of the Olmec is characterized by large stone monuments, especially the well known heads of the Africoid rulers of Olmec land that have striking features similar to the rulers of the 25th Dynasty of Egypt. These findings show that the original people of the planet traveled the planet. This idea of Africans and Ethiopians traveling the world and trading with others peacefully is inconsistent with the idea that Europeans were first in everything and are superior. Especially the fact that when Europeans began to travel the world, they savagely and ruthlessly murdered millions, stealing their resources, those facts had to be hidden. To create a new way of thinking for the European world view, the original people of the planet from which even the Europeans descended from, that image and history had to be changed.
The first person to ever divide the “so-called” races “on the basis of skin color” was the German Johan F. Blumenback, 1752-1840 AD. He considered the Caucasian to be the original race. Blumenback, an anthropologist, named the Whites after the Caucasus Mountains, because he thought the purest White people originated there. German anthropologist, physiologist, and comparative anatomist, frequently called the father of physical anthropology, who proposed one of the earliest classifications of the races of mankind. Blumenbach was the first to show the value of comparative anatomy in the study of man’s history. His research in the measurement of craniums led him to divide mankind into five great families—Caucasian, Mongolian, Malayan, Ethiopian, and American.
Archaeological evidence shows that the first humans were Black. Why do some historians and Christians deny this? Because, some Christians prefer to believe that dark skin is a result of a curse by God rather than the creativity of God. That is why most Christians deny that Christ had dark skin, even though all of the evidence clearly points to it. If Paul looked like and Egyptian then so did Jesus. That is the problem with believing that God wrote the books of the Bible when it is the creation of men and their opinions of other people when it comes to Black people and anyone else that needed to be devalued in their eyes. Also taking note of the fact that this other group of people who say they were chosen, wrote those things about the very people who created the ideas from which theirs and other religions flowed.
Who were the Africans who sailed to America before Columbus? Indian scholar R.A. Jairazbhoy, among others, states that the earliest settlers were Ancient Egyptians led by King Ramses III, during the 19th dynasty. Van Sertima also believes that most of the explorers sailed from Egypt, but during the much later 25th dynasty. Many other scholars insist that the navigators came from West African nations, such as Ghana, Mali and Songhay.
Nicholas Leon, an eminent Mexican authority, recorded the oral traditions of his people. Some of them reported that the oldest inhabitants of Mexico were Blacks. The existence of Blacks and giants is commonly believed by nearly all the races in their various languages they had words to designate their existence.
Early Mexican scholars were convinced that the impact of the Black explorers on the New World was profound and enduring. One author, J.A. Villacorta, has written: “Any way you view it; Mexican civilization had its origin in Africa.” Modern excavations throughout Latin America appear to confirm Villacorta’s conclusions.
Columbus left crew members on the island of Hispaniola after his second voyage to America in 1493-94. But the new analysis of the remains of 20 individuals excavated two decades ago by Italian and Dominican archaeologists portray a different picture, suggesting that living among the Spaniards at La Isabela were native Taínos, women and children, and possibly individuals of African origin. Teeth from exhumed skeletons of crew members Christopher Columbus left on the island of Hispaniola more than 500 years ago reveal the presence of at least one African in the New World as a contemporary of the explorer, it was announced. It was known that Columbus had a personal African slave on his voyages of discovery.
James Burton, in collaboration with researchers from the Autonomous University of the Yucatan in Mexico, is attempting to flesh out the details of the La Isabela colony that lasted less than five years. The human remains used in the study were buried without the formalities of coffins or shrouds, and were excavated from what was once the church graveyard of the town Columbus established. Headstones and other identifying markers have long since faded to nothing or have been lost entirely during the 500 years since the bodies were first interred.
The contemporary Black educator has an enormous challenge. One of his or her prime tasks must be the research, resurrection, and the dissemination of information about the long suppressed contributions Africans in Africa and the Diaspora have made toward the development of world civilization. It is transparent from existing literature that traditional academic disciplines, mainly the social sciences, have given a distorted representation of the African experience.
The fact that Africans could have visited the Americas before Columbus should call for no stretch of the imagination, for Africa is less than 2,000 miles from South America. By 1900, the notion that Africans could have traveled to the Americas had moved beyond the stage of speculation. It was now definite that Africans had made contact with the Americas. Peter ReRoo, in his “History of America before Columbus,” was quite firm in acknowledging the fact that Africans had settled in the western hemisphere and made contact with Native Americans.
Proof of ancient Negro arrivals is the fact that Negro colonies found by the Spanish and Portuguese discoverers on the eastern coasts of South and Central America. Mendoza encountered a tribe of Negroes, and Balboa, when on his famous expeditions of the discovery of the Pacific Ocean, met in the old province Quareca, at only two days’ travel from the Gulf of Darien, with a settlement of Negroes.
In 1920 Leo Weiner, a Harvard University philologist, produced a pioneering examination of the existence of Africans in the Americas prior to the arrival of Columbus, which appeared as volume one of “African and the discovery of America.” Volumes two and three followed in 1922. While doing an investigation of Native American languages, Wiener learned to his amazement that there was a considerable African influence on these languages. After further study he was led to conclude that much of the American archaeological work done on both Africans and Native Americans was erroneous.
In the first volume he showed that Negroes had a far greater influence upon American civilization than has heretofore been suspected. Arguing that West Africans had made numerous voyages to America before Columbus, Wiener noted that: The presence of Negroes trading in America before Columbus is proved by the representation of Negroes in American sculpture and design, by the occurrence of a Black nation at Darien early in the 16th century, but more specifically by Columbus’ insistent reference to Negro traders from Guinea, who trafficked in a gold alloy, guanin, of precisely the same composition and bearing the same name, as frequently referred to by early writers in Africa.
Black people certainly sailed to America in ancient and medieval times and left a profound imprint on New World soil. Jairazbhoy indicates that many Black people began their livelihood in America not as a slave but as master.
Another scholar concerned with pre-Columbian African influence in the Americas strengthens Wiener’s position regarding the African presence in ancient Mexican history. Joel A. Rogers, the prolific Black writer and student of world civilization, in Africa’s Gift to America suggested that “Africa played a role, perhaps, the chief role in the earliest development of America—a period that antedates Columbus by many centuries, namely Aztec, Maya, and Inca civilizations. About 500 B.C. or earlier, Africans sailed over to America and continued to do so until the time of Columbus. Additionally, Rogers quoted several Mexican authorities on the subject.
C.C. Marquez says, ‘The Negro type is seen in the most ancient Mexican sculpture… . Negroes figure frequently in the most remote traditions.’ Riva-Palacio, Mexican historian, says, ‘It is indisputable that in very ancient times the Negro race occupied our territory (Mexico). The Mexicans recall a negro god, Ixtilton, which means ‘Black face’.” Their Mexican guides agreed. As one of the tours ended and prepared to return to the U.S., one of them proclaimed: “I would like to thank the African people for bringing civilization to the New World.” It is high time for the American media and academic establishment to admit the same.
Archaeological expeditions and findings in Mexico provide empirical evidence regarding the position set forth in this essay. In his authoritative study, The Ancient Sun Kingdoms of the Americas, Victor W. Von Hagen discussed the pre-Aztec civilization known as the Olmec. Von Hagen puts the existence of the Olmec between 800 B.C. and 600 A.D., indicating that they were situated in the south of Mexico near Vera Cruz, Tabasco, and La Venta. Of the Olmec, Von Hagen writes:
In Aztec mythic history, the Olmec were known as ‘the people who lived in the direction of the rising sun’ and a glyph history of them shows that their paradise of ‘wealth’ consisted of rubber, pitch, jade, chocolate, and bird feathers. We do not know what they called themselves. ‘Olmec’ derives from Olli (rubber). They traded rubber and they presumably made the rubber balls used for the game called tlachtli. For untold centuries burial mounds and pyramids built by them lay covered by the jungle; here archaeologists have found carved jade, sensitively modeled clay figurines ‘of an unparalleled high artistic quality,’ said Miguel Covarrubias. Only in recent times have the great Olmec stone heads been unearthed, by Dr. Matthew Sterling. At Tres Zapotes he found one colossal head seven feet high, flat-nosed and sensually thick-lipped.
The huge stone heads of Olmec deities, exhibited an unmistakably African physiognomy, as can be easily seen from the photographs and drawings of these massive sculptures. During the last decade of the 19th century, the first of these gigantic heads was found in Vera Cruz by J. M. Melgar, who in 1896 published a monograph on his findings. “This cabeza colossal, as the Mexicans called it, was half buried, but enough of it was visible for an occasional observant traveler to notice its ‘Ethiopian features’ and the presence of a headdress resembling a football helmet.”
Later, in 1902, an Olmec artifact was found near the Bay of Campeche in the Gulf of Mexico. The jade figurine contained a date on it corresponding to 98 B.C. Interested in this find, Matthew Sterling, an American archaeologist and director of the Bureau American Ethnology, was to lead nine expeditions into the Mexican Gulf coast commencing in 1938, at which time he found five colossal heads in La Venta in the state of Tabasco, five to nine feet high and weighing as much as 20 to 30 tons each.
A very important indication of African influence is in the knowledge of pyramid building which is a specialized form of construction. In Egypt Africans progressed from the step pyramid of Djosser, to the finished product at Giza. La Venta was the location of the first pyramid in the Americas. There was no sign of any progressive learning, these pyramids were built and the pyramids are the same measurement as in Egypt.
During the spring of 1967, Michael Coe, of Yale University, led an expedition to San Lorenzo in southeast Mexico. As did Sterling, Coe located numerous Olmec artifacts, which again included a giant stone head, as well as altars and pyramids. Coe suggests that the Olmec were the earliest Maya and had declined by the rise of the Aztecs.
One might merely ask himself: if Africans were not present in the Americas before Columbus, why the typically African physiognomy on the monuments? It is in contradiction to the most elementary logic and to all artistic experience to suggest that these ancient Olmec artists could have depicted, with such detail, African facial features they had never seen.
From the preceding discussion there should be little doubt that Africans arrived in the Americas long before Columbus; rather, they had an extensive influence on early American cultures: social, religious and artistic. A recent study of pre-Columbian art in Latin America reveals that the African presence was profound. Although acknowledging the presence of Asiatic influences in pre-Columbian art, Alexander von Wuthenau, in The Art of Terracotta Pottery in Pre-Columbian Central and South America, is very firm about pervasive African influence. Describing photographs of Olmec figurines contained in his book, von Wuthenau says, two Negroid heads are quite conspicuous. They prove that this racial type can be found nearly everywhere in ancient America. Likewise, it should be kept in mind that Africans held positions of considerable importance in ancient American societies. It would thus be flying in the face of truth to deny the African presence in pre-Columbian America. A Black navigator, Pedro Alonso Nino traveled with Columbus first expedition to the New World. Through DNA testing, a Danish scientist has determined that at least two of Christopher Columbus shipmates were Africans.
The Negroid element is the exception, but is well proven by the large Olmec stone monuments as well as the terracotta items and therefore cannot be excluded from pre-Columbian history of the Americas. Furthermore, it is precisely the Negroid representations which often indicate personalities of high position, who can unhesitatingly be compared to the outstanding Negroes who served as models for great works of art in Egypt and in Nigeria.”
Recent discussions of the high level of culture and maritime skill of West Africans lend additional credibility to the claims of Wiener, Rogers, von Wuthenau and others that Africans braved the roaring waters of the Atlantic Ocean and established relationships with Native Americans more than one thousand years ago. Harold G. Lawrence, in an article, “African Explorers of the New World,” states emphatically, “We can now positively state that the Mandingoes of the Mali and Songhay Empires, and possibly other Africans, crossed the Atlantic to carry on trade with the Western Hemisphere Indians and further succeeded in establishing colonies throughout the Americas.” Due to diplomatic relations with Morocco, the Malian emperor Sakura (1285-1300 A.D.) learned of advanced maritime techniques and the spherical nature of the earth. Various Arab writers, some of whom were Abdul-feda, Idrisi, Masudi, Abu Zaid, and Istakhri, developed geographies and formulated astronomical theories.
More than anything else, the legacies of slavery and colonialism have been devastating to African peoples, and the effects of these human institutions linger on. Probably the most painful legacy of European oppression was the systematic Miss education of Black people in Africa and abroad.
Again let me say: We have been educated or indoctrinated away from our true selves by Europeans that we do not actually know who we are. It might be suggested that we have received a contrived, misleading, and faulty education. Indoctrinated by this method of education has prevented us from relating effectively with ourselves, we are instead pulled away toward the imitation of the European man and his culture, thus killing the man in us.
Professor Harold G. Lawrence indicates that Abubakari II (1305-1307) curious about the Arab theories on the spherical nature of the earth and voyages around the world sent a fleet of 400 ships into the Atlantic Ocean, informing the captains not to return until they had found land or run out of supplies. After a considerable time had passed, one ship returned, its captain telling Abubakari that the others had perished in violent waters. Abubakari then led a fleet of some 2,000 ships into the Atlantic. Before departing Abubakari conferred temporary authority to his brother, Mansa Musa, certain that he would return, unfortunately, Abubakari never did.
Ronald W. Davis, utilizing Arabic and French sources in an essay entitled, “Negro Contributions to the Explorations of the Globe,’ corroborates Lawrence’s account of Malian voyages into the Atlantic. Mansa Musa, who has by the early 1320s conquered new territories and integrated the older provinces into the Mali empire, gained lasting international fame primarily because of the lavish hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca) he undertook in 1324. Arriving in Cairo and receiving considerable attention, as would be expected, Mansa Musa was asked about his succession to the throne. He thus told of his predecessor’s speculation about the outer reaches of the Atlantic and his sending a fleet. Davis’ account is thus very similar to that of Lawrence. Commenting on Mansa Musa’s narrative, Davis says, “It is difficult to accept the proposition that Mansa simply invented this story,”
It is known that Mali, although in essence an inland empire, did have an outlet to the sea in the Senegambia area during parts of the fourteenth century. There is no better point of leaving for the Americas than this particular section of the African coast, for here expeditions may take advantage of the Northeast trade winds, which blow increasingly and consistently almost year round in a vast arc dodging the northwest coast of Africa and curving toward the great eastern bulge of South America. Columbus himself, for reasons not yet certain, chose to drop from Spain to latitudes comparable to those of Senegambia before starting the ocean crossing.
We might be a little more certain about Columbus’ reasons if we consult J. A. Rogers, who writes, “it is even possible that Columbus had heard of the New World from Africans brought to Spain and Portugal in his time. Furthermore, Columbus spent some time in West Africa just before he left Spain for America.”
Basil Davidson, in The Lost Cities of Africa, supplied further evidence, showing that trans-Atlantic voyages were made by West African seamen before and during the reign of Mansa Musa. Omari, in the tenth chapter of his Masalik al-absad, reproduces a story which suggests that Atlantic voyages were made by mariners of West Africa in the times of Emperor Kankan Musa of Mali; and which roundly states that the predecessors of Kankan Musa embarked on the Atlantic with two thousand ships and sailed westward and disappeared… yet Mali had outlets of the Atlantic seaboard, while North African mariners evidently knew of the Azores several centuries before the voyages of Columbus.
Probably one of the most recent historical examinations of the extent of the pre-Columbian existence of Africans in the Americas has been undertaken by John G. Jackson. In his Introduction to African civilizations, Jackson discussed African cultural influences in ancient America. Utilizing an overabundance of sources, Jackson traced the African presence in the Americas as far back as three thousand years. Jackson shows that the African influences in ancient America religious systems were profound.
The American
Public Educational System
The American public educational system has made the Black male synonymous with disabled. The following labels, like behavior disorders and emotional disorders are used to support the idea that African American boys do not know how to behave without special treatment, juvenile probation, or drugs. This marker condemns African American boys to the very bottom of the educational ladder. We must face the fact that very few architects, teachers, business owners, or doctors, will come out of these behavioral classes. African American boys have become public education’s monster. They are to be feared, mistrusted, mere animals to be confined to cages.
Many African Americans act mute in the presence of Caucasians. Many African Americans agree with any and everything that comes out of the mouths of Europeans when in their presence. Lots of us become childlike when in the presence of Caucasians. You know we smile at almost near everything they say.
The foundations of American society is based on projected belief that African American males have got to be perceived as criminal, sex maniac, senseless brute, uninformed consumer, and entertainer. And on top of that we are experiencing children having children and our children killing other Black children at a phenomenal rate.
Our children are now killing themselves. It is our children roaming streets alone or in gangs all day and night and the parents seem powerless to stop them. It is our own African American children who are floating through life like driftwood just lying on a beach. Just children who are now addicted to tobacco and alcohol, heroin and cocaine and pot, drinking and drugging themselves to death to escape reality or selling drugs to each other. Now it is our children running away from home and being thrown away or abused and neglected by parents. And now excessive numbers of our children are being locked up in jails with adult criminal mentors or all alone and our children growing up seething with rage and crushed by depression. We are losing our children not all but too many.
Why in the world are we learning European history when our children still see themselves as “niggers?” This lesson is not helping to improve our self-image nor our self-awareness. One day I saw a young girl ask an older Black girl could she go with her. The older Black girl turned around and told her no “nigger,” you can’t go. What struck me was the level of hatred, power and violence with which she said that. It was in the shrill vibrations of her voice! We program ourselves and use words to demean each other because we have not been taught how great we are. How often I heard the African American children and adults call one another “nigger,” “whore,” and “bitch.” We even make music with those kinds of words in the music. Just in case you did not know, the vibrations in music drive the message deeper into the subconscious. I thought about how these same Brothers and Sisters invalidate each other about skin color and hair texture on an hourly basis growing up and continuing into adulthood. However White children are being elevated, polished, and shined in the classroom. Yet we continue to trust other people to be fair and understand that we need our history rather than starting classes to teach our own. It is not the responsibility of other people to teach our children our own history, it is ours! European American children are receiving a Eurocentric education that is designed to maintain and advance European/Caucasian/Western values.
Our children are being taught that the world’s oldest civilization began in Asia. The illustrations in books many times are of Caucasians with tans. Egypt is taught in a very mystical manner deliberately taught as it being separated from Africa. African empires are barely discussed. When I went to school, you heard nothing about African Kingdoms, absolutely nothing!
This complicated but well planned, dishonest presentation of world history confuses African American boys and girls. They never see the relationship between the ancient Egyptians and themselves and often perceive Africa in a less than positive light, because this is how it is presented in class. The only time they are certain they’re being discussed is when the book discusses the Western slave trade and this re-enforces the feelings of lower self-esteem. What is important here is that African American children are often taught that African people in general and African Americans in particular, had no way of life before the Western slave trade. Such vague, unclear teachings about African people is intentionally planned, made compulsory for teaching, and implemented by the European Americans who control this nation’s educational policies.
From kindergarten to twelfth grade, most African American children are taught a national curriculum that negates the achievements of African people. African American children who master this European curriculum without knowing anything true and worthwhile about Africa are being indoctrinated against their own interests. A Eurocentric curriculum by African children who have no knowledge of self is merely an advanced form of programmed destruction. The adoration of the European curriculum teaches people of color to admire and respect White people while simultaneously holding ourselves in contempt. Much of this programming happens while you are young and it does not really kick in until later grades, 5th and 6th in my case, then you understand that you are Black and something is wrong with Black.
Today Africans specifically are pictured and projected as being uncivilized and that the areas we live in such as the inner cities, are “jungles.” This is implying that African Americans are causing societal deterioration in the United States. European Americans are contaminated by television images of Black males who place them in danger as long as there are unsophisticated, savage African Americans running around in this country’s “jungles,” called the inner city. This belief causes severe Caucasian paranoia which leads to a philosophical mistrust of African American males. The welfare of their little White children is in jeopardy. Tax dollars are being wasted. And, in the extreme case, the savages must be eliminated!
Today it’s Attention Deficit Disorder with or without Hyperactivity and Conduct Disorder and Socially Maladjusted and Emotional-Behavior Disordered and Mildly Mentally Handicapped. Today it’s Ritalin, Tofranil, Prozac, and Mellaril. Tomorrow, what will it be psychosurgery, zombie pills, guinea pig-ology and psycho-laser castration? As we give our precious African children over to Caucasians to be taken care of, they truly will be taken care of, further incarceration, experimentation, and eventual extermination. What else do you expect America to do for them? Educate them to run this country? Teach them to become Xerox and IBM executives? Help them become President of The United States? Help them become business owners or bank presidents? Educate them to run hospitals? Help them become surgeons and architects? What do we expect White America to do for African children, especially boys, when we send them to their school?
When it comes down to rewriting the curriculum, many African American teachers find that Whites, generally, agree to change very little. Few Caucasians are open to having facts about African and African American people made known to an entire city’s school system. The Caucasian children and parents may become upset; the African children may become angry after learning all the White lies—this is Caucasian rationalization.
Some Caucasians have an inherent fear of Africans knowing the truth about what they did to us. And, some of us are just as bad! A sure sign of a negative pathology in some African Americans is their disagreement with African-centered anything. Our blind, wholesale acceptance and adoration of any and everything European is sick. Many Brothers and Sisters who disagree with anything African centered have absolutely no problem acknowledging and believing in White Santa Claus, a Caucasian Christ, White fairies, and, in general, White people. They view their pathology as OK. Caucasian people are comfortable and secure with African people being ignorant about themselves and their history. Whites continue to need us as African Americans to be self-destructive. We are no threat to their power as long as we exhibit self-destructive beliefs and actions.
Adopting a philosophy of African centeredness is a crucial step in reclaiming our rightful place on this planet. I know from experience that the African centered approach works best with African children. I have seen the eyes of African boys and girls light up as they were taught about their ancestors dating back to 4100 B.C. Our children love learning about themselves. They love learning that there is no difference between them and the Brothers and Sisters of their glorious past. They love seeing the pictures of the statues of our people’s accomplishments. Their attitudes and behavior begin to change for the better. African American adults who frown at African centered do not understand this. Many of these professional African American men and women do not understand the miseducation reality of little African girls and boys learning everything about England, Spain, Germany, Italy and France but nothing about Kemet, Cush, Ta-Merry, Ghana, Mali, or Songhay. What they do learn about Africa is a bunch of lies and half-truths.
We must stop and think for a moment: Where are the Irish American boys? Where are the Italian American boys? Where are the German American boys? Where are the Jewish American boys? Where are the Korean boys? And, the Japanese boys, where are they? And, the Chinese boys, where are they? They are definitely not crowding Emotional Behavior Disorder classes, In-School Suspension classes, youth detention centers, jails, funeral parlors, and graveyards. They are being “educated” to seize power and run America and the world. Our little African boys will be the source of income for many members of the other groups mentioned. Our little African boys will go to their stores to buy the latest jewelry, designer clothes, and athletic shoes. Our little African boys will be their clients in American criminal courts. Our little African boys will be the patients who receive their “medications.”
The American educational system has no intention of truly educating African American children. Power is the goal of American education, power to create enterprises and employ your own people, power to not have to beg philanthropists and governmental bodies for money, power to free your sons and daughters from the promise of a life of juvenile detention cells, jail cells, and premature deaths. Real power is to take charge of our own destiny and educate our children and that is only part of what we need!
In a country where the public educational system is becoming more non-White in terms of student population, and more Caucasian in terms of teaching population, African Americans are in for a very rude awakening unless we educate ourselves and educate our children to the real world they face.
Politically speaking, the definition of power is the ability to define reality and convince a people to apply your definitions to their lives. By doing so, in effect, create an imaginary world perceived through the lens of your all manufactured, but yet to be proven, concepts. African American people are having their entire worldviews altered by the definitions provided by the mental health establishment. For example, up until 1980 a highly energetic African-American boy was just that, a young man full of energy and no one had a problem with an energetic youth. Today, that same youth is considered to be mentally disordered and in need of medication.
It must be understood that when a professional psychologists/psychiatrists sits down with the child to conduct an evaluation, whether he spends one day or one month with that child, his or her results represent nothing more than a sampling of that child’s intellectual, emotional or physical behavior; it is only a snapshot in time. The danger of psychological/psychiatric diagnosis is that we, the African American community, take the often irrelevant and inaccurate assumptions of European experts as the gospel truth and project these professional opinions onto our children thereby creating a self fulfilling prophecy.
To allow someone to tell you what your child can and cannot do is one of the greatest examples of trust, and transfers of power, that can be given to another person. Countless lives have been destroyed by invisible glass ceilings that have been placed upon our children’s heads by outsiders.
These quotes are from whom are Johnson’s book, Psycho Academic Holocaust, the special education and ADHD wars against black boys. Dr. Umar Johnson is a Dr. of Clinical Psychology and is certified school psychologist is 39 years old a black man and has 6 degrees. I highly recommend that you obtain this book and give careful consideration to was being done to our children to be forewarned is to be forearmed. I had the good fortune and privilege to be in a lecture conducted by Dr. Umar Johnson. It was phenomenal to hear a black man 39 years old with so much knowledge and power. It was both startling and tragic that this kind of information is not dispensed through the church. These are acts of chemical warfare be used against our future and yet there is no alarm from the church. There is no outcry from the pulpits across America. I highly recommend this book. If you want to sample Dr. Umar’s DVDs go to U Tube and enter his name in the search engine.
African American children are in trouble: Although most children are exposed to a few major life events, African-American, inner city children consistently are exposed to extremely high rates of exposure to traumas during youth. The children who grow up in low-income, urban neighborhoods are frequently exposed to extreme conditions. These elevated rates of exposure are stressors involving threats to life or physical safety, which subsequently causes terror, helplessness, or disorganized behavior in children. For children residing in low-income, urban neighborhoods, daily living conditions involve a wide variety of public incivilities that impact the entire community. They are frequently exposed to adults carrying on illicit activities within dysfunctional lifestyles (drug dealing, gambling, stealing, gang membership, etc.), and often witness or are victimized by community violence. They often spend their time in homes, schools, and neighborhood facilities that are crowded, poorly maintained, and inadequately heated/cooled, with substandard plumbing and lighting. These stressors continue to compound as living in poor urban neighborhoods significantly affects family and parenting processes.
Children from disadvantaged neighborhoods are more likely to experience any number of major family stressors, such as family chaos, conflict, violence and dissolution, victimization, incarceration and or death of a family member, and neglect and or mistreatment than children raised in more affluent communities. They are also prone to live through financial instability, residential instability and or homelessness, parental mental illness and or substance abuse. For those children who experience family conflict and violence it is usually not experienced as single events but as ongoing, multi-generational patterns of family conflict resolution.
Worry over the physical safety or well-being of a parent, or dealing with actual loss are frequent concerns for children living in low-income, urban environments. Besides witnessing domestic violence, children in low-income, urban environments too often experience harsh physical discipline; this experience ranges from spankings or whipping to severe beatings. Too many babies are born to teen mothers. Too many babies are born without health insurance. Too many high school students drop out. Too many children are confirmed as abused or neglected. Too many babies are born into poverty. Too many babies are born to mothers who are not high school graduates. Too many babies are born to unmarried mothers. However these numbers are more devastating in the African American and Latino communities. In the richest nation on earth, 35.3 percent of Black children, 28.0 percent of Latino children and 10.8 percent of White, non-Latino children live in poverty. The next step for most of these children is to be locked up.
Richard Bullard, Pastor of a Black Evangelical Baptist Church in the rural city of Pine Bluff, Arkansas says this in his book, Tellin’ It Like It Is, An African Centered Evangelical Christian Interpretation of Black Life and Issues, “I have some serious concerns about the future state of Black people in America. The litanies of social ills that highlight the evening news about Black people are well documented. However, the issue that seems most pernicious to this writer are the ubiquitous nature of the problems that Black folks are having raising their children. It does not take a theologian or social scientist to understand that a community’s inability to influence the direction of its children will render it vulnerable and defenseless to any and every form of attack from its enemies.”
The War
Violent crime rates in the nation’s biggest cities are generally projected and understood as a reflection of the presence and behavior of the Black men, women, and the children who live there. The U.S. prison population is larger than at any time in the history of the penitentiaries anywhere in the world. Nearly half of the more than two million Americans behind bars are African Americans, and an unprecedented number of Black men will likely go to prison during the course of their lives. These harsh statistics are well known and frequently cited by White and Black Americans; indeed for many they define Black humanity.
Most people take for granted the War on Drugs was launched in answer to the crisis caused by crack cocaine in inner-city neighborhoods. This outlook holds that the racial disparities in drug convictions and sentences, as well as the rapid explosion of the prison population, reflect nothing more than the governments’ zealous efforts to address out of control drug crime in poor, minority neighborhoods. This view, while logical, given the sensational media coverage of crack in the 1980s and 1990s, is simply wrong. The real reason goes back to the 13th Amendment to the Constitution: The Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution outlaws slavery and involuntary servitude, except as punishment for a crime. It was passed by the Senate on April 8, 1864, by the House on January 31, 1865, and adopted on December 6, 1865. On December 18, Secretary of State William H. Seward proclaimed it to have been adopted. It was the first of the three Reconstruction Amendments adopted after the American Civil War. But, White Americans were thinking ahead even when they passed the 13th amendment and the war on drugs is a war on the freedom of African Americans.
While it is true that the media hype surrounding crack cocaine led to a remarkable increase in funding for the drug war. Also, the sentencing policies greatly exacerbated racial disparities in incarceration rates. There is no truth to the notion that the War on Drugs was launched in response to crack cocaine. President Ronald Reagan officially announced the drug war in 1982, before crack became an issue in the media or a catastrophe in poor Black neighborhoods. A few years after the drug war was declared, crack began to spread rapidly in the poor Black neighborhoods and in cities across the country. The Reagan administration hired staff to publicize the appearance of crack cocaine in 1985 as part of a premeditated effort to build public and legislative support for the war on drugs.
The media crusade was an astonishing success. Almost overnight, the media was flooded with images of Black “crack whores,” “crack dealers,” and “crack babies” and these images seemed to confirm the worst negative racial stereotypes about poor inner-city residents. The media bonanza neighboring the “new demon drug” helped to project the War on Drugs from an ambitious federal policy to an actual war. The War on Drugs began at a time when illegal drug use was on the decline. During this same time period, however, a war was declared, causing arrests and convictions for drug offenses to skyrocket, especially among people of color. The timing of the crack crisis helped to fuel conspiracy theories and general speculation in poor Black communities that the War on Drugs was part of a genocidal plan by the government to destroy Black people in the United States. From the outset, stories were dispersed on the street that crack and other drugs were being brought into Black neighborhoods by the CIA.
The impact of the drug war has been astounding. In less than thirty years, the U.S prison population exploded from around 300,000 to more than 2 million, with drug convictions accounting for the greater part of the increase. The United States now has the highest rate of incarceration in the world, dwarfing the rates of nearly every other developed country in the world, even surpassing those in highly repressive regimes like Russia, China, and Iran. Most people imagine that the explosion in the U.S. prison population during the past twenty-five years reflects changes in crime rates. Few would guess that our prison population leaped from approximately 350,000 to 2.3 million in such a short period of time due to changes in laws and policies, not changes in crime rates. Yet it has been changes in our laws, particularly the remarkable increases in the length of prison sentences—that have been responsible for the growth of our prison system, not increases in crime.
Prison labor booms as unemployment remains high and companies reap the benefits. The Huffington Post in an article by Simon McCormack on December of 2012 talked about how the American government has been critical of China’s forced-labor policies, when compared to the United States which has a mushrooming prison labor pool of its own. Even Russia filed a report that said hundreds of companies now benefit from the low and sometimes no-wage labor of America’s prisoners. Prison labor is being gathered on a massive scale. Nearly a million prisoners are now making office furniture, working in call centers, fabricating body armor, taking hotel reservations, working in slaughterhouses, or manufacturing textiles, shoes, and clothing, while getting paid somewhere between 93 cents and $4.73 per day. Some prisoners don’t make a dime for their work. Many inmates in Racine, Wisconsin, for example, are not paid for their work, but receive time off their sentences.
While Building a$400 Million dollar Prison, Pennsylvania’s School Reform Commission voted on June 1st to close 23 Philadelphia Public Schools, nearly 10 percent of the city’s total schools. Due to a $304 million debt, students will return to school in the fall without many essentials; including books, papers, clubs, assistant principals, etc. While the second-most expensive state project ever, nearly 3,000 people will lose their jobs. Meanwhile, while the city has recently begun work on a $400 million prison project, newly unemployed teachers might consider submitting their resumes to the Department of Corrections, while the supposedly cash-strapped government is digging deep to spend $400 million for the construction of State Correctional Institutions.
The United States imprisons a larger percentage of its Black population than South Africa did at the height of apartheid. No other country in the world imprisons so many of its racial or ethnic minorities. These stark racial disparities cannot be explained by rates of drug crime. Studies then and now show that people of all colors use and sell illegal drugs at surprisingly similar rates. If there are noteworthy differences in the surveys to be found, they frequently suggest that Whites, particularly White youth, are more likely to engage in drug crime than people of color. The predominately White college campuses are rampant with drug use but you do not see police actively patrolling the college campuses; only the inner cities are the “hunting grounds.”
In the criminal justice system full-blown trials of guilt or innocence rarely occur; many people never even meet with an attorney; witnesses are more often than not paid and coerced by the government; police regularly stop and search people for no reason whatsoever; penalties for many crimes are so severe that innocent people plead guilty, accepting plea bargains to avoid harsh mandatory sentences; and children, even as young as fourteen, are sent to adult prisons here in America. Most Americans probably have no idea how common it is for people to be convicted without ever having the benefit of legal representation, or how many people plead guilty to crimes they did not commit because of fear of mandatory sentences. While the majority of illegal drug users and dealers nationwide are White; three-fourths of all people imprisoned for drug offenses have been Black or Latino.
When I was told of the Conspiracy charge against me, I asked the judge for time so that I could get an understanding of what Conspiracy meant; I did not understand the charge. Even after pleading guilty to Conspiracy, I had no idea of the magnitude of what I was admitting to. Not until I was serving prison time with thousands of other African American males serving time for the same charge—Conspiracy—did I become curious as to what this Conspiracy charge really means.
Dunbar, Keith V. (2010-10-12). Conspired Redemption: A True Story of Winning In The Game of Life (Kindle Locations 2044-2048). CreateSpace. Kindle Edition.
The New Jim Crow, and you should by that book by Denise Alexander along with Keith Dunbar’s book Conspired Redemption to understand that what is happening today is nothing new but based on old practiced methods of using us for cheep labor. Both books are brilliant in understanding the prison industrial complex and the explanation of the conspiracy used to lock up Black Americans in mass.
When the South lost the Civil War and slavery was outlawed, the South had no free labor to work the fields. It was no secret to President Lincoln or Congress the hardship the South would be under when it lost its labor pool. So, The Federal Government offered a nice caveat in the 13th Amendment—the crime exception clause. Immediately after the Civil War, Negroes started getting locked up for newly passed Black Codes and various Federal offenses. Now, guess what the Government did with all of these new prisoners? It started leasing them out to plantation owners and businesses in the South that needed cheap labor. The Negro prisoners—ex slaves—still provided free labor, only now it was to the Government of the United States. And the Government in turn leased the labor out for a cost to former slave owners. The Government in essence began to make money on the slave labor of Negroes, something it was not able to do before the passing of the 13th Amendment. How sweet was that master plan? Leasing out prisoners was called convict leasing. It has evolved into a much more sophisticated practice of using slave prison labor. It’s called Unicor—Factories with Fences—and it was written into law with an Executive Order by President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Dunbar, Keith V. (2010-10-12). Conspired Redemption: A True Story of Winning In The Game of Life (Kindle Locations 2200-2204). CreateSpace. Kindle Edition.
Huge cash grants are made today to those law enforcement agencies that were willing to make drug-law enforcement a top priority. The new system of control is traceable, to a significant degree, to a massive bribe offered to state and local law enforcement by the federal government. Suddenly, police departments were capable of increasing the size of their budgets, quite substantially, simply by taking the cash, cars, and homes of people suspected of drug use or sales. At the time the new rules were adopted, the law governing civil forfeiture was so heavily weighted in favor of the government that fully 80 percent of forfeitures went uncontested. Property or cash could be seized based on mere suspicion of illegal drug activity, and the seizure could occur without notice or hearing, upon an ex parte showing of mere probable cause to believe that the property had somehow been “involved” in a crime.
Mandatory drug sentencing laws strip judges of their traditional role of considering all significant conditions in an effort to do justice in the individual case. Nevertheless, unsympathetic mandatory minimum sentences for drug offenders have been consistently upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court. In 1982, the Supreme Court upheld forty years of imprisonment for possession and an attempt to sell 9 ounces of marijuana.
Several years later, in Harmelin v. Michigan, the Court upheld a sentence of life imprisonment for a defendant with no prior convictions who attempted to sell 672 grams which is approximately 23 ounces of crack cocaine. The Court found the sentences imposed in those cases “reasonably proportionate” to the offenses committed and not “cruel and unusual” in violation of the Eighth Amendment. This ruling was extraordinary given that, prior to the Drug Reform Act of 1986; the longest sentence Congress had ever imposed for possession of any drug in any amount was one year. A life sentence for a first-time drug offense is unheard of in the rest of the developed world. Even for high-end drug crimes, most countries impose sentences that are measured in months, rather than years. For example, a conviction for selling a kilogram of heroin yields a mandatory ten-year sentence in U.S. federal court, compared with six months in prison in England. Remarkably, in the United States, a life sentence is deemed perfectly appropriate for a first-time drug offender.
Since the War on Drugs, private litigants represented by organizations such as the ACLU have been at the forefront of racial profiling litigation. Those days, however, have come to an end. The racial profiling cases that swept the nation in the 1990s may well be the last wave of litigation challenging racial bias in the criminal justice system that we see for a very long time. Because the Supreme Court has authorized the police to use race as a factor when making decisions regarding whom to stop and search, police departments believe that racial profiling exists only when race is the sole factor. Thus, if race is one factor but not the only factor, then it doesn’t really count as a factor at all.
The Supreme Court has now closed the courthouse doors to claims of racial bias at every stage of the criminal justice process, from stops and searches to plea bargaining and sentencing. The system of mass incarceration is now, for all practical purposes, thoroughly immunized from claims of racial bias. Staggering racial disparities in the drug war continue but rarely make the news. The legal rules adopted by the Supreme Court guarantee that those who find themselves locked up and permanently locked out due to the drug war are overwhelmingly Black and Brown.
Once labeled a felon, the symbol of inferiority remains with you for the rest of your life, relegating you to an undying second-class status. Consider, for example, the harsh reality facing a first-time offender who pleads guilty to felony possession of marijuana. Even if the defendant manages to avoid prison time by accepting a “generous” plea deal, he may discover that the punishment that awaits him outside the courthouse doors is far more severe and debilitating than what he might have encountered in prison. Unable to drive, get a job, find housing, or even qualify for public benefits, many ex-offenders lose their children, their dignity, and eventually their freedom—landing back in jail after failing to play by rules that seem hopelessly stacked against them.
For most people coming out of prison, a criminal conviction adds to their already challenging profile. About 70 percent of offenders and ex-offenders are high school dropouts, and according to at least one study, about half are functionally illiterate. Many offenders are tracked for prison at early ages, labeled as criminals in their teen years, and then shuttled from their decrepit, underfunded inner city schools to brand-new, high-tech prisons. The communities and schools from which they came failed to prepare them for the workforce, and once they have been labeled criminals, their job prospects are forever bleak. They are prepared for Prison and unless there is some intervention, their fate is sealed.
Not surprisingly, for many Black men, the hurt and despair gives way to resentment. A Black minister in Waterloo, Mississippi, explained his outrage at the fate that has befallen African Americans in the post civil rights era. “It’s a hustle,” he said angrily. “‘Felony’ is the new N-word. They don’t have to call you a nigger anymore. They just say you’re a felon. In every ghetto you see alarming numbers of young men with felony convictions. Once you have that felony stamp, your hope for employment, for any kind of integration into society, it begins to fade out. Today’s lynching is a felony charge. Today’s lynching is incarceration. Today’s lynch mobs are professionals. They have a badge; they have a law degree. A felony is a modern way of saying, ‘I’m going to hang you up and burn you.’ Once you get that F, you’re on fire.”
The Racial Gap in criminal sentencing has always been enormous between African-American, Latino men and White Men. In a up to date study by the U.S. sentencing commission they found that Black Men receive 20% longer sentences for the same crimes as White Men period. The study also exposed the fact that Black males were 25% less likely than White Males in the same period to receive a sentence below the guidelines’ range. For some reason this was a shock to some people, partly because most people buy into the fairness, justice, so-called color blind society even though African-Americans have always faced inequality and racism in America. Even now in 2013 the odds in society are still stacked against you in many ways based on your skin color. Some people tend to lose sight of this fact especially because President Obama is in office or because racism isn’t as visible to the general public as it once was compared to it being covert or subliminal in how it operates now, but you can see it in the resistance to this Presidency that goes beyond reason. The approach is systematic to the way some Whites are brought up, taught and believe in as well.
When judges were forced to follow sentencing guidelines, those guidelines did things like inflict far stronger penalties for crack than for powder cocaine which directly targets the Black Community meaning that Black men tended to receive harsher sentences.
Now I wonder how they are they planning to keep the prisons 90 percent full? 40 percent of those given drugs in school for “behavior” problems wind up on real drugs or go to prison. Guess who the target population is?
Philadelphia will be closing er public schools, while building a $400 million prison. Pennsylvania’s school reform commission voted on June 1st to close nearly 10 percent of the city’s total schools. Due to a $304 million dollar debt, students will return to school in the fall without many essentials; including books, papers, clubs, assistant principals, etc. While nearly 3,000 people will lose their jobs the city has recently begun work on a $ 400 million dollar prison project which could be the second-most expensive state project ever. Newly unemployed teachers might consider submitting their resumes to the Department of Corrections though that supposedly cash strapped government is digging deep to spend the $400 million for the construction of State Correctional institutions, Phoenix I and II.
The penitentiary, which is technically two facilities, will supplement at least two existing jails, the Western Penitentiary at Pittsburgh and Fayette County Jail. Pittsburgh’s Western Penitentiary was built in 2003 with the original intention of replacing Fayette County Jail, but the prison has struggled with lawsuits claiming widespread physical and sexual abuse of prisoners. Scheduled to be completed in 2015, the new prison’s cell blocks and classroom will be capable of housing almost 5,000 inmates. Officials said there will be buildings for female inmates, the mentally ill and a death row population.
Just days after Philadelphia officials pushed the city one step closer to the new education plan that would see two dozen schools close; construction began on a $400-million prison. Ignoring hours of pleas from students, parents, educators and community members who warned the budget would cripple city schools; commissioners rejected a proposal that would have only closed four of the 27 schools that were on the block for closure.
Without the means to cover a $304 million debt, students can expect to go back to school in September without new books, paper, counselors, clubs, librarians, assistant principals or secretaries. All athletics, art and music programs would be eliminated and as many as 3,000 people could lose their jobs.
It was noted that the racial disparities in the education system and prison complex, where 60 per cent of all people are of color, have created a literal school-to-prison-pipeline. In fact, in Philadelphia, black students comprise 81 per cent of those who will be impacted by the closings despite accounting for just 58 per cent of the overall student population. In stark contrast, just 4 per cent of those affected are white kids who make up 14 per cent of Philadelphia’s students.
Only one of five state commissioners voted against the proposal, warning that Republican Pennsylvania Governor Tom Corbett’s administration had not looked hard enough elsewhere for proper funds. That $304 million windfall is unlikely to be filled because the Republican-controlled Pennsylvania House of Representatives recently passed a tax break for corporations that will cost Pennsylvania residents an estimated $600 million to $800 million annually.
American schools teach White children to feel great about a shared lie called history and our children are simultaneously through omission of true history, that we have done nothing in history until Europeans brought us here. And combined with that there is no urgency to know your African history, no urgency to know yourself and teach the children the TRUTH. The first step is that you have to know the truth that existed before the books they have given us to BELIEVE in. What is more powerful, to KNOW or to BELIEVE?
Staughton Craig Lynd (born November 22, 1929) is an American White conscientious objector, Quaker, peace activist and civil rights activist, tax resister, historian, professor, author and lawyer. His involvement in social justice causes has brought him into contact with some of the nation’s most influential activists. He wrote the forward on a book called’ “Who needs the Negro?” that was published by Anchor Books, Doubleday & Company Inc. And, on the back of the book I paraphrase the following information from the forward.
Professor Wilhelm indicated that the key point is that slavery came into being for economic reasons, and racism came into being to rationalize the enslavement of Blacks. It does not follow that, because racism is economic in origin, racism can readily be overcome by any economic change. The racism of White Americans has become a dominant self-directed white social value. In this he repeatedly indicated that racism expresses itself, that if the White American no longer needed the Black American’s labor, he might then feel free to express his racism fully: not merely to exploit the Black American, as in the last 300 years, but to literally kill him.
Please take note that this is a White Professor who came up with those ideas. Maybe you should read it again. It is his assessment of racism as it moves throughout time to a conclusion and that conclusion is the death of African Americans—in his educated opinion.
While harboring constant resistance toward non White people, White America could not dismiss the Black man until the invention of machines and computers which severed America’s addiction upon cheap labor. Now the economics of technology combines with racism to make possible the Black man’s total segregation into Ghettos like you see now and possibly even into the near future for the purpose of extermination.
Since the introduction of automation during the 1950s, White America has been able to develop its racism more fully and force an unwanted people into the ghetto as a way of life. Increasingly, we as Black people face the alternatives of passive acceptance of the ghetto fate or to taking the initiative by resorting to past tactics of confrontations, marches, prayer vigils, protests, begging and killing ourselves by the thousands in big city in response to White American systematic racism of hating everything Black including ourselves.
Now is the time to think and create differently. Since you cannot NOT create since you were created to create, the question is what will Black people create? We are still basing what we do on a so called struggle for equality of treatment in America and not a struggle for independence. And, I am not talking about separation; I am talking about independent thought, action, behavior and positive results. We are still struggling to be equal in all things American. But as we march, pray, beg and protest, very little changes in terms of Black people controlling our own communities in positive ways. Ninety percent of our energy as Black people is being spent begging and pleading and passively standing by as our communities are destroyed, much of the time by us. The act of aggression and the practice of selling Black people as individuals rather than in family units prevented the creation of a durable Black family.
In Church many times while we are a praying, and praising and a hooping and a hollering locked in a bubble that only serves our emotions, other people are planning how they can continue to make money off us and then get rid of us at the same time using drugs and prisons. Nothing has changed except we have become more ignorant of the real world and the tactics that are used to defeat us.
The ghetto is the modern equivalent of the Indian reservation. Just as the Indians were viewed as a substandard race of people, and were given whiskey, sold by White man, so the Black people of today are “the other” and we are ravaged by drugs and alcohol. The Black family (and the Black male/ Black female relationship) was systematically destroyed by over 500 years of institutionalized slavery, racism, and racist media stereotypes.
The White family was not affected by this in a negative way actually all of that worked in their favor. In actuality, Black couples have the same pressures White couples have in addition to the social, psychological, and economic pressures of being Black in a racist society. Whites are not penalized for being White; they are rewarded at the expense of non-Whites. Black males and females are pitted against each other by the White dominance systems of subjugation via the economic, educational, social, political, legal, and law enforcement systems that penalize all non-Whites. This, in reality is why Blacks and Browns have longer sentences for the same crimes.
The British fought a war with China in 1839 through 1842 and forced China to import opium because of the trade imbalance. China was gaining wealth from the sale of tea and other items produced in China. China fought to keep from accepting Opium but lost thereby pushing the trade balance to the benefit of the British. Drugs have been used as a weapon to disrupt trade and to suppress and control populations throughout history.
Should the Black man break out of his reservation and begin to burn and loot in central business districts as he has occasionally done within the ghetto, he will be destroyed as ruthlessly as the Indian. Armed revolution is not the answer, for the American law and order slogans that would sweep the nation are not to express justice, but to implant self righteousness and release the unabated European heritage of violence toward undesirable minorities and incompatible ideas mainly from Black and Brown people. Not only that but White Americans are armed to the teeth and many are preparing for an eventual race war or some other breakdown in society and in that case Black people are outnumbered, outgunned and not trained. The real answer lies in our ability to become indispensable through education.
The point is that without becoming educated to the extreme, Black people may very well come to be treated much as the American Indian, locked into reservations or perhaps even eliminated through genocide. Again, as one White American said to me years ago, looking straight into my eyes without blinking or embarrassment, in a discussion on race we were having, “We can get rid of you just like we got rid of the Indians.”
It is unrealistic to believe White America will allow Black America to command cities through political methods. The tremendous wealth of the nation is concentrated under the authority of urban governments. To hand over control of the city to the Blacks would amount to a Black takeover of America’s wealth. Blacks elected to office in our cities are elected not for the benefit of Black people but for White people. Blacks therefore really don’t have representation that would benefit Black communities, schools and education at all. Well, you do not see the kinds of changes implemented that reverses the crime, unemployment and substandard education in predominate Black cities. Black elected officials in the cities are too busy trying to satisfy White people. Black people represent a decided minority in America forming 10% of the total population and consequently are exposed to the will of White America. In short, many opportunities exist for the continual disenfranchisement of Black voters.
Should the Black vote deliver the pivotal vote and make a real difference, acts of voter suppression such as you see thriving among Republicans since the election of Barak Obama a Black President of the United States will continue to proliferate unless stopped by those who love freedom for all. This is evident and the nationwide attempt by Republican operatives in government who are changing the voting laws to impede the progress of any Black influence is the perfect example. Even the Supreme Court has flung open the doors to more voter suppression.
The reliance on urban areas to account for current Black restlessness draws upon an extremely accepted sociological school of thought developed as the nation itself shifted from the country to the city. The urban idea has been used to explain just about any phenomenon; crime, family, fertility, social mobility, planning, creativity, land utilization, power and authority, social disorganization, mental illness, social stratification, education, transportation, social values, suicide, reading interests, voluntary organizations, religion, technology, government, consumption, leisure, and the list goes on. Now by simply referring to the urban problem, its links Black, Brown and poor people together in the new term the “urban” problem.
It is unnatural and distorted for a race of people to adopt a perspective and a set of standards that does not benefit their group and at the same time denies their own ability to be normal and demonstrate self-worth as members of that same group. Unfortunately, this kind of distorted thinking is exactly what has led to the personality disorders and self-hatred issues that plague the Black population.
Gradually we are approaching the time in this world when the Black people of the world will either conscientiously, through their own organizations, go forward to the point of destiny as laid out by ourselves, or see themselves pushed back first into the mire of exploitation and second to be exterminated ultimately by the strong hand of prejudice. These are the prophetic words of warning from none other than the maligned Black leader of the Black masses of the 1920s Marcus Garvey.
Racism and ethnic discrimination in the United States has been a major issue since the colonial era and the slave era. Legally sanctioned racism imposed not just a heavy burden on Native Americans, but their eventual destruction as a nation. Also, African Americans, Asian Americans, and Latin Americans have suffered under racism and discrimination. European Americans (particularly Anglo Americans) were privileged by law in matters of literacy, immigration, voting rights, citizenship, land acquisition, and criminal procedure over periods of time extending from the 17th century.
As the government and state becomes the foremost employer for the working force in general during the transition into automation, it becomes even more so for the Black worker. Indeed, if not for the government, Blacks who lost their jobs in the business world would swell the unemployment percentage to fantastic heights. The economics of business appear intent on weeding out the Black as an inefficient worker, leaving the government to provide the only actual source, if the opportunity exists at all, for employment. This is why you have some politicians pushing for individual rights devoid of government oversight. Whites can then bar anyone they deem undesirable from any business. This is one of the reasons why when you hear the cry of the Republicans repeatedly over the long sustained period of time that government must be shrunk, that government is too big. The reason they say government is too intrusive is because Black people do have good paying jobs and this allows them to move into the middle class. By the shrinking of government you are talking about shrinking the opportunities of Black people to ascend into middle-class status.
We have to have and develop tactics and strategies for Black survival. In the presence of this continuous onslaught of psychological and sociological warfare, or will we give up completely, begging and pleading the government and God without positive actions. That would be equivalent to the person who is playing the Black side of the chessboard, begging the White side to let them win or let me move first sometime. So, if you know you are playing from the Black side of the chessboard and you ask the White side to let you make some points, they ought to take you to the nearest mental hospital. That’s just not the way the game is played.
White dominance, at its foundation, is a social, economic, and political system based on the belief that Whites are superior to non-Whites. Racism is systematic discrimination (the denial of rights and benefits) by Whites against non-Whites in all areas of human activity: economics, education, entertainment, labor, law, politics, religion, sex, and war.
Communications—99% of the TV, radio and print media properties are owned by White people. Construction—99% of the construction in this country is done by White people. Education—99% of all educational resources are allocated by White people. Transportation—99% of all transportation is controlled by White people. Justice—this system is 99.9% controlled by White people. Financial—this system is 99.9 % controlled by white people.
The action of Whites against Blacks and other non-Whites by depriving them of income, promotions, jobs, housing, land, and any other rights if they choose to do so is considered normal by many Whites. It doesn’t matter that some Whites are poorer than some Blacks in America. In all things, in all systems of power and in all places in America, Whites are collectively more powerful than Blacks are collectively. This imbalance of White power creates the opportunity and the ability to practice racism against non-Whites. For White people this is not personal, this is how things are. In many situations they expect to be in charge and for you as an African American to follow their lead. There is no morality to appeal to; it’s a normal way of living life for many of them. There is no fairness or lack of fairness; it’s all a way of life that Whites stick together in that system. Black people are taught that we must love everybody regardless and yet we are not demonstrating love for each other. White people in general stand behind their systems of thought, action and behavior.
For example, when a White policeman shoots an unarmed Black man 40 or 50 times, his fellow officers, the police chief, internal affairs, the union, the media, the prosecutor, the judge, and the jury will support, defend, and finance that White police officer’s “right” to shoot (murder) an unarmed Black person. That is White collective power. It is rare for a White police officer to be punished for using excessive force against any Black man, woman, or child and if by chance it does happen, very little time is served in prison if any. It is just as rare for a Black police officer to use excessive force against a White person. If Black police officers were shooting White people the way we as Blacks are being killed, believe me there would be a national outcry and an investigation until that problem is solved.
In late 2010, the degradation of mortgage lending and its disastrous effects, especially on minorities whom predatory lenders had targeted, had become obvious to all. This is another example of White collective power is the mortgage and real estate industry, which systematically discriminates against Black (and non-White) renters, homebuyers, and homeowners by red-lining which is the unethical practice whereby financial institutions make it extremely difficult or impossible for residents of poor inner-city neighborhoods to borrow money, (even though we put money in their banks) gain approval for a mortgage, take out insurance or gain access to other financial services because of a history of high default rates.
Redlining is the practice of denying, or charging more for, services such as banking, insurance, access to health care, or even supermarkets, or denying jobs to residents in particular, often racially determined, areas. The rejection does not take the individual’s qualifications and creditworthiness into account. Then as in the case of the housing bubble use reverse red-lining which is the practice of targeting these same communities or protected classes for predatory lending. Reverse redlining is a term that was coined by Gregory D. Squires, a Professor of Sociology and Public Policy and Public Administration at George Washington University. This phenomenon occurs when a lender or insurer particularly targets minority consumers, not to deny those people loans or insurance, but rather to charge them more than would be charged to a similarly situated majority consumer, specifically marketing the most expensive and onerous loan products. These communities had largely been ignored by most lenders just a couple decades earlier. However these same financial institutions in the 2000s saw black communities as fertile ground for subprime mortgages. Wells Fargo for instance partnered with churches in black communities, where the pastor would deliver “wealth building” seminars in their sermons, and the bank would make a donation to the church in return for every new mortgage application. There was pressure on both sides, as working-class blacks wanted a part of the nation’s home-owning trend.
A survey of two districts of similar incomes, one being largely white and the other largely black, found that branches in the black community offered largely subprime loans and almost no prime loans. Studies found out that high-income blacks were almost twice as likely to end up with subprime home-purchase mortgages as low-income whites. Loan officers were clearly aware that they were exploiting their customers, in some cases referring to blacks as “mud people” and to subprime lending as “ghetto loans.”
The creditor may not even offer better terms to other borrowers, but the key element of reverse redlining is the targeting of protected racial groups, elders, and others for unusually bad credit terms. Predatory mortgage lenders were targeting minority neighborhoods and that these lenders had an unusually large share of lending in African-American and Hispanic neighborhoods. Targeting minority areas for fraudulent sub-prime home loans that are designed to self-destruct became big business. Inflating home appraisals in racially changing neighborhoods to defraud (overcharge) minority homebuyers. Low-balling is a sales tactic that involves initially quoting a low price and then claiming the quote was a mistake and the real price is higher. Many customers are inclined to accept the higher price because they have already decided to make the purchase.
Refusing to rent or sell to minorities in certain geographical areas. Raising property taxes in minority areas to drive minority residents out of desirable inner-city neighborhoods is called gentrification. Gentrification is a dynamic that emerges in poor urban areas when residential shifts, urban planning, and other phenomena affect the composition of a neighborhood. Urban gentrification often involves population migration as poor residents of a neighborhood are displaced. In a community undergoing gentrification, the average income increases and average family size decreases. This generally results in the displacement of the poorer, pre-gentrification residents, who are unable to pay increased rents, and property taxes, or afford real estate. Also, there is the exclusion from special financing deals that are not generally known to the public, and are only offered to a select group of White buyers for the benefit of Whites.
Banks, real estate brokers, appraisers, and mortgage lenders represent institutional racism and power that is reinforced by the courts, banking, and government systems. This does not mean Blacks are less likely to abuse power than Whites if given the opportunity. We have seen plenty of examples of that. It means Blacks cannot abuse power that does not exist. The proof is that there is no place in America where Blacks are collectively practicing racism against Whites collectively. And, as I said before, this is normal behavior for Whites, not all White people but enough who are in power to deny power to others collectively.
Power is controlling the financial, political, and educational institutions so you and your kind benefit. Real power is the ability to control your own images and the images of those who are less powerful than you are. Most Black people will say, “What difference does it make,” when asked about a White Jesus. But those who imposed those images on your mind know the value of that power; that is why they do it.
Command and real authority is the ability set up systems to determine who goes to jail, for what crime, and for how long. Power is the ability to vote in an election. Power is other on people coming to you to get what they need and you deciding how much they get. Black people while in the Prison system at various levels of power do not have that kind of power. Power is the ability to feed you and those you value without depending on others. Power is the ability to generate and produce what you need to survive all of which includes your own infrastructure and necessities such as electricity, gasoline, water, housing, food, clothing, weapons, schools, universities, currency, banking, and hospitals all without depending on others for your survival. Black people do not command that kind of collective power nor do we work in that direction. White people feel it is normal to do that. We are taught we need to “love” everybody and do not be too Black.
Power is the ability to decide what your currency looks like; how much it is worth; and how much it buys; whether it is a gallon of milk or a gallon of gas. Power is the ability to determine who lives where, how many of them can live there, and how long they can stay there. Power is the ability to move populations and to determine what part of what city will be Black and what part will be White. Power is the ability to own land that no one can take from you, even with eminent domain, because YOU make the laws. Power is the ability to punish a police officer for shooting an unarmed man 41 times.
To believe Blacks have the same opportunity as Whites to get justice is illogical and ludicrous when Whites control the police, the media, the courts, the appointment of judges, the laws, the district attorneys, even in the DNA analysis labs DNA evidence, more famously known for exonerating wrongfully convicted people, has contributed to false convictions, especially when other, flawed, evidence chronologically precedes it, such as a mistaken eyewitness identification or false confession. DNA crime labs across the nation increasingly are finding themselves under both federal and state criminal investigations. Even the FBI’s DNA crime lab is under scrutiny by Justice Department Inspector General (IG) ordered a sweeping audit of the bureau’s forensic laboratory. In Florida, DNA lab worker recently admitted to falsifying DNA data in a test designed to check the quality of work. The state, however, refused to retest any of the cases on which he worked, claiming the falsification was an isolated incident that did not affect criminal cases. He has been fired.
In Arizona, technicians made errors while analyzing DNA evidence in nine criminal cases currently under review. State audits reveal that only 26 percent of 8,000 blood samples from convicted offenders have been analyzed.
In Oklahoma, a forensic scientist work came under scrutiny after evidence indicated she provided allegedly false testimony that led to the wrongful conviction of a death-row inmate who eventually was freed. She had been involved in 3,000 cases, including 23 in which defendants were sentenced to death. Eleven were executed. Defense attorneys are wondering if any of those 11 inmates was innocent. It may be difficult to find out because, in many instances, the technician destroyed or used up all the DNA or blood evidence. How much of that evidence is based on race? I was in court, perhaps 35 years ago when I was an active alcoholic and drug addict for a case. I can remember to this day when a White man stood before this White judge and his charges were read off. I do not remember exactly what the judge said to him but by contrast the very next person who came before this judge was Black. He had the exact same charges and both men had the same records. The White judge threw the book at this Black man so much so that a murmur and a cold chill went through the court room. Everyone was aware of what just took place as we saw the White judge moving his mouth after sentencing as if he were eating something with distain. His whole demeanor changed when addressing this Black man. There was not one person in the courtroom that was not aware of what happened. Even the court officers froze for a moment in time as did the packed court room, but no one said anything because he was the judge and he had power.
The African American Black collective often acts against its own self-interest without understanding why we are doing it. We fail to understand we have been programmed through the language at a subconscious level to be against anything Black including ourselves. It also explains most of the Black collective’s self-destructive behaviors. This inferiority programming is the main reason many Blacks refuse to identify with the Black collective simply because it is the Black collective and Blacks can’t be intelligent, smart, good looking, and scholarly etc. etc.
In fact, the need to pretend to be colorblind is actually another tactic used to keep the conversation of race to a minimum, in my opinion. A White person making that false claim is probably in denial about racism. Any Black person who claims to be colorblind, while at the same time being a victim of racism because of their skin color, clearly illustrates his or her confusion about White psychological warfare. Otherwise, why deny the ability to see color unless color has some negative associations or provokes feelings of guilt or shame? Why does the discussion about color evoke such feelings perhaps now as you read this? The reality is that it is impossible to ignore color in America when America was built on the color line. In America color matters and that is a fact of life. Racism is normal in the United States and there is nothing colorblind about American society.
The smaller the White minority is, the greater the need to oppress the non-White majority on the planet. When the White minority is greatly outnumbered, they will feel more threatened and become more determined to do whatever they deem necessary, no matter how cruel, wicked, unjust, or immoral in order to maintain their economic, educational, and political domination over non-Whites. Whites who are practicing racism simply don’t care that they are benefiting from the offense of racism even if they are not practicing racism at that moment.
The will refuse to tell who is practicing racism; how racism is being practiced; and refuse to help the victims with the information they have in their possession to eliminate racism by exposing and opposing Whites who practice it except some comment about “chicken,” which amounts to nothing yet it is blown up in the media, when the system of racism operates at all times everywhere in the world in one form or another through the English language and numerous other means.
The print media has enabled Europeans to monopolize scholarship; radio has provided the electronic propaganda sent round the world, television projects the image enhancement movies with its revisionist historical distortions and the manufacturing of images. Satellite communication systems and global information continue control of educational institutions creating dysfunctional Black people and children.
Since our enslavement, White people have taken everything we produce, developed and originated for their benefit. Consequently, the thought of us as African Americans controlling our own culture is unthinkable to them and it seems that we don’t seriously consider it a possibility either since many of us will have nothing to do with the word African. It is important for us to realize that European Whites have a thorough understanding of the dynamics of culture. They are aware and know that it is very important and a liberating agent, they know it! They know that if any people are to be controlled the imprisonment of their culture is crucial.
Racism is usually defined as views, practices and actions reflecting the belief that humanity is divided into distinct biological groups called races and that members of a certain race share certain attributes which make that group as a whole less desirable, more desirable, inferior or superior.
“All warfare is based on deception.” Sun Tzu, the art of War.
What I would like to see is the constant struggle for civilization coming in every sector of society. I know that we have not seen the full extent of this change in national character in the educational sector because I work in it every day and see the results of the rumpled spirits that are unable to climb out of the barrel of ignorance yet wish to keep others back. When each person, or a significant enough number of Americans, fights against all forms of racist insult, ignorance, discrimination, and prejudice, whether in spirit or in action, in voice or in writing, then we will be on the road to becoming a civilized nation, starting now.
Only by embracing all of America’s history can we be on the road to national social survival. Our history is brutal and bloody. But it is the story of this land, and no amount of trying to hide it from our children or we will ever solve the problem of racism. The history must be confronted in a mature manner. The decimation of the native peoples and the enslavement of the African peoples are twin testaments of the birthing pains of our national consciousness. Understanding both of these blights on our past and present is critical to our survival for now and the future. The following was paraphrased from Molefi Kete Asante’s book Erasing Racism.
What will be the true ending to this human saga? What is the future of America? It is yet to be written. The following are sayings from ancient Egypt.
The lips of Wisdom are closed, except to the ears of Understanding.
Give your ears, hear the sayings, Give your heart to understand them; it is an advantage to put them in your heart, if you neglect them you will suffer! Let them rest in the container of your belly, May they be bolted in your heart; When there rises a whirlwind of words, they’ll be a mooring post for your tongue, a guide. If you make your life with these in your heart, you will find it success and safety; you will find my words a storehouse for life; your being will prosper while upon earth.
Mastery of self consists not in abnormal dreams, visions and fantastic imaginings or living, but in using the higher SPIRITUAL FORCES against the lower thus escaping the pains of the lower by vibrating on the higher.
The purpose of all human life is to achieve a state of consciousness apart from bodily concerns.
Salvation is the freeing of the soul from its bodily fetters; becoming a God through knowledge and wisdom; controlling the forces of the cosmos instead of being a slave to them; subduing the lower nature and through awakening the higher self, ending the cycle of rebirth and dwelling with the Neters who direct and control the Great Plan
Know thyself as the pride of creation, the link uniting divinity and matter; behold a part of God Itself within thee; remember thine own dignity nor dare descend to evil or meanness. Make your life the subject of intense inquiry, in this way you will discover its goal, direction, and destiny.
To free the spirit, control the senses; the reward will be a clear insight.
To Know God, strive to grow in stature beyond all measure; conceive that there is nothing beyond thy capability. Know thyself deathless and able to know all things, all arts, sciences, the way of every life. Become higher than the highest height and lower than the lowest depth. Amass in thyself all senses of animals, fire, water, dryness and moistness. Think of thyself in all places at the same time, earth, sea, sky, not yet born, in the womb, young, old, dead, and in the after death state.
Bibliography
African History 2\Blacked Out by White Wash p_ 2.htm
Alexander, Michelle and West, Cornel (Introduction) The New Jim Crow [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Allegro, John Marco The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Christian Myth [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Ashby, Muata, AFRICAN DIONYSUS: FROM EGYPT TO GREECE: The Kamitan Origins of Greek Culture and Religion [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Ashby, Muata, EGYPTIAN MYSTERIES VOL 2: Dictionary of Gods and Goddesses This book is about the mystery of neteru, the gods. (May 6, 2011)—Kindle eBook Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Ashby, Muata, Egyptian Proverbs
Ashby, Muata, EGYPTIAN YOGA: THE PHILOSOPHY OF ENLIGHTENMENT [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Ashby, Muata, HEALING THE CRIMINAL HEART. Introduction to Maat Philosophy, Yoga and Spiritual Redemption Through the Path of Virtue [Kindle Edition]
Ashby, Muata MEDITATION The Ancient Egyptian Path to Enlightenment [Kindle Edition] (Author) Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Ashby, Muata The African Origins of Western Civilization, Religion, and Ethics Philosophy [Kindle Edition]
Ashby, Muata THE MYSTICAL JOURNEY FROM JESUS TO CHRIST: Origins, History and Secret Teachings of Mystical Christianity [Kindle Edition]
Ashby, Muata THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS: The Ancient Egyptian Philosophy of Self-Realization [Kindle Edition]
Atwill, Joseph, Caesar’s Messiah: The Roman Conspiracy to Invent Jesus: Flavian Signature Edition [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Baines, John and Malek, Jaromir, Atlas of Ancient Egypt, published by Facts on File, Inc., 460 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016 Copyright ©1980 1982
Baker, Phyllis, AFRICAN-AMERICAN SPIRITUALITY, THOUGHT & CULTURE Kindle Edition Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Bargeman, Lisa Ann The Egyptian Origin of Christianity Kindle Edition Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Barton, Paul Alfred A History of the African-Olmecs Black Civilizations of America from Prehistoric Times to the Present Era Copyright ©1998, 2001 Paul Alfred Barton
Bauval, Robert and Osman, Ahmed Breaking the Mirror of Heaven: The Conspiracy to Suppress the Voice of Ancient Egypt [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Blackmon, Douglas A. Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II [Kindle Edition]
Bloom, Joshua and Waldo, Martin, E., Jr., Black against Empire; (2012-12-15). University of California, Press. Kindle Edition. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc, Copyright © 2013
Bordewich, Fergus M., America’s Great Debate: Henry Clay, Stephen A. Douglas, and the Compromise That Preserved the Union Copyright © 2012[Kindle Edition] Sold by Simon & Schuster 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020 Digital Sales Inc
Bradley, Michael, Introduction by John Henrik Clarke Iceman Inheritance: Prehistoric Sources of Western Man’s Racism, Sexism and Aggression Kayode Publications LTD., 15 West 24th Street, New York, NY. 10010
Browder, Anthony T. Nile Valley Contributions to Civilization (Exploding the Myths) Published by The Institute of Karmic Guidance PO Box 73025, Washington, DC 20056
Budge, Wallis E. A., Egyptian Religion [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Budge, Ernest Wallis, Alfred Osiris and the Egyptian resurrection (2013-04-12). Kindle Edition. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Burrell, Tom, Brainwhashed, Challenging the Myth of Black Inferiority, Copyright 2010, Smiley Books, 250 Park Avenue South, Suite 201, New York, NY 10003
Casas, Bartolome, De Las, A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies, Edited by Bigel Griffin, Introduction by Anthony Pagden Penguin Classics Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Churchward, Albert The Origin and Evolution of Religion
Clarke, John Henrik Christopher Columbus and the Afrikan Holocaust: Slavery and the Rise of European Capitalism
Cleage, Albert B. Jr., Black Christian Nationalism New Directions for the Black Church 1972 Copyright © 1972 by Albert B Cleage Jr. William Morrow & Company, Inc, New York
Cleage, Albert B. Jr., The Black Messiah The religious roots of Black Power Copyright © Sheed and Ward, Inc 1968
Columbus, Christopher and Cohen J. (Translator) The Four Voyages of Christopher Columbus (Classics) [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Darkwah, Nana Banchie The Africans Who Wrote the Bible
Diop, Cheikh Anta, Ngemi, Yaa-Lengi Meema (Translator) Civilization or Barbarism: An Authentic Anthropology [Kindle Edition] Published by Lawrence Hill Books, Brooklyn, New York, NY. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Doane, T. W., Bible Myths and their Parallels in other Religions Being a Comparison of the Old and New Testament Myths and Miracles with those of the Heathen Nations… Considering also their Origin and Meaning COPYRIGHT, ©1882. COPYRIGHT RENEWED, ©1910 Printed in U.S.A. Kindle Edition.
DuBois W E B The Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the United States of America 1638-1870 Kindle Edition Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Dunbar, Keith V., Conspired Redemption: A True Story of Winning In The Game of Life (2010- 10-12). Kindle Edition. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Durant, Will Caesar and Christ: A History of Roman Civilization and of Christianity from Their Beginnings to A.D. 325 (Story of Civilization) Copyright © 1944 1997 Published by MJF books PO Box 0930, Planetarium Station, New York, NY 10024-054
Edgerton, Robert B. The Fall of the Asante Empire: The Hundred-Year War For Africa’s Gold Coast Kindle Edition Sold by Simon & Schuster Digital Sales Inc
Ehrman, Bart D., Forged: Writing in the Name of God—Why the Bible’s Authors Are Not Who We Think They Are Kindle Edition Sold by HarperCollins
Ehrman, Bart D. Jesus Interrupted: Revealing the Hidden Contradictions in the Bible (And Why We Don’t Know About Them) Kindle Edition Sold by HarperCollins
Ehrman, Bart D., Misquoting Jesus Kindle Edition Sold by HarperCollins Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Einspahr, Bruce Index To Brown Driver and Briggs Hebrew Lexicon
Eusebius of Caesarea History of the Church [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services.
Findley, Mary C.; Findley, Michael OT and NT Manuscript History (2012-04-03). Findley Family Video. Kindle Edition. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Florian, History of the Moors of Spain [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Freire, Paulo Pedagogy of the Oppressed l Summary & Study Guide [Kindle Edition] Book Rags Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Freke, Timothy and Gandy, Peter The Jesus Mysteries: Was the “Original Jesus” a Pagan God? Kindle Edition Sold by Random House Digital, Inc.
Gabriel, Richard, Jesus The Egyptian: The Origins of Christianity And The Psychology of Christ [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Gadalla, Moustafa Egyptian Divinities: The ALL Who Are THE ONE [Kindle Edition]
Gadalla, Moustafa The Ancient Egyptian Culture Revealed [Kindle Edition] Sold By: Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Gesenius, H. F. W.A Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament
Ginzburg, Ralph 100 Years of Lynchings (2013-06-02). Black Classic Press. Kindle Edition. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Gladden, Washington Who Wrote the Bible?: a Book for the People (2012-05-12) Kindle Edition. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Graham, Lloyd M, Deceptions and Myths of the Bible [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Greenberg, Gary 101 Myths of the Bible: How Ancient Scribes Invented Biblical History (Sep 1, 2002)—Kindle eBook
Greenberg, Gary The Moses Mystery, The Egyptian Origins of the Jewish People, Copyright ©1996, Published by Pereset Press, PO Box 25, New York, NY 10008
Hannay, James Ballantyne, The Rise, Decline and Fall of the Roman Religion
Hayes, John H and Miller, Maxwell J., A History of Ancient Israel and Judah, Copyright © 1986 Published by The Westminster Press, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Healing the Shame that Binds You: Recovery Classics Edition [Kindle Edition] John Bradshaw Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc
Heron, Patrick The Nephilim and Pyramid of Apocalypse [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Hess, Penny, foreword by Omali Yeshitela, Overturning The Culture of Violence, Burning Spear Uhura Publications, PO Box 3757, St. Petersburg, FL 33731 Copyright © Burning Spear Uhura Publications
Hochschild, Adam, King Leopold’s Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror, and Heroism in Colonial Africa [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Houston, Drusilla Dunjee Wonderful Ethiopians of the Ancient Cushite Empire Kindle Edition Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Imhotep, David Ph.D The First Americans Were Africans: Documented Evidence Kindle Edition Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Jabbar, Malik H. The Astrolocigical Foundation of the Christ Myth Book Two Published by Rare Books Distributors, PO Box 7072, Columbus, Ohio 43205
Jackson, G.M. The Jesus Delusion [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Jackson, John G., Introduction by John Henrik Clarke, forward by Runoko Rashidi, Introduction to African Civilizations: Copyright © 1970, 1994, Copyright © 2001, Published by Kensington Publishing Corp., 850 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
Jackson, John G., Pagan Origins of the Christ Myth
James, George G. M. Stolen Legacy Illustrated Edition [Kindle Edition] (Author)
Jarvis, E. K., Before Egypt [Kindle Edition]
Johnson, Umar PhD. Psycho-Academic Holocaust The Special Education & ADHD Wars against Black Boys Copyright 2013 by Umar Johnson & Prince of Pan-Africanism Publishing
Josephus, Flavius, Whiston, William (Translator) Antiquities of the Jews [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Kuhn, Alvin Who is this King of Glory? A Critical Study of the Christos-Messiah Tradition (Jul 6, 2010)—Kindle eBook
Lane, Charles The Day Freedom Died: The Colfax Massacre, the Supreme Court, and the Betrayal of Reconstruction [Kindle Edition] Sold by Macmillan
Larkin, Clarence, Dispensational Truth, Publishers Rev. Clarence Larkin E. PO Box 334, Glenside, PA 19038 Copyright © 1918, 1920
Las Casas, Bartolomé De (Author), Anthony Pagden (Introduction) A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies (Penguin Classics) [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Leary, Joy Degruy Ph D., forward by Randall Robinson, Post Traumatic Slave Syndrone, Copyright © 2005, Published by Uptone Press, 4220 SE Aldercrest Rd., Milwaukie, Oregon 97222
Leedom, Tim C., Editor The Book your Church Doesn’t Want you To Read, Copyright 2003 by The Truth Seeker Company, PO Box 28550, San Diego, CA 92198
Loewen, James W. Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History Textbook Got Wrong [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Long, Jason, Biblical Nonsense: A Review of The Bible For Doubting Christians [Kindle Edition]
Mauer, Marc Race to Incarcerate [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
McFadyen, John Edgar, Introduction to the Old Testament [Kindle Edition]
Merriam, George Spring The Negro and the Nation A History of American Slavery and Enfranchisement [Kindle Edition]
Middelton-Moz, Jane Shame & Guilt: Masters of Disguise [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Molefi, Kete Asante, Erasing Racism: The Survival of the American Nation. Kindle Edition.
Montagu, Ashley Man’s Most Dangerous Myth: The Fallacy Of Race [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Morgenson, Gretchen and Rosner, Joshua Reckless Endangerment: How Outsized Ambition, Greed, and Corruption Led to Economic Armageddon [Kindle Edition]
Morrow, Alvin Breaking the Curse of Willie Lynch, the science of slave psychology. Rising Sun Publications 11220 W. Florissant Avenue, Florissant, MO. 63033 Copyright © 2003
Morton, Janks and Toldson, Ivory Black, People Don’t Read [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Moustafa, Gadalla, Pyramid Handbook, Published by Tehuti Research Foundation, PO box 39406, Greensboro, NC 27438-9406
Muhammad, Khalil Gibran The Condemnation of Blackness: Race, Crime, and the Making of Modern Urban America [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Muller, Gert Nubian Origins of Egyptian Predynastic Civilization [Kindle Edition] By: Sold By: Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Muller, Gert The Black Madonna and Christ: What The Da Vinci Code Did Not Say (May 27, 2013)—Kindle eBook Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Murdock, D.M. The Origins of Christianity and the Quest for the Historical Jesus Christ [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Nation of Islam The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews Volume Two How Jews Gained Control of the Black American Economy Copyright © 2010 by Larimer Associates.
Oden, Thomas C., How Africa Shaped the Christian Mind: Rediscovering the African Seedbed of Western Christianity Kindle Edition Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Painter, Nell Irvin The History of White People published by W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 fifth Avenue, New York, NY. 10110 Copyright © 2010 by Nell Irvin Painter
Paris, Peter J. The Spirituality of African Peoples [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Poole, Stanley Lane, The Story of the Moors in Spain, Introduction by John G. Jackson, Published by Black Classic Press, PO Box 13414, Baltimore, MD 21203
Porter, Michael Kill Them Before They Grow: Misdiagnosis of African American Boys in American Classrooms [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Price, Andrew L., The Truth About Race, Color and Racism In America: “The Truth About The Concept Of Race Based On Skin Color” Sold By: Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Rediker, Marcus, The Slave Ship: A Human History Kindle Edition Sold by Penguin Publishing Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Rogers World’s Great Men of Color, Volume I: 1 J.A., John Henrik Clarke Kindle Edition Sold by Simon & Schuster Digital Sales Inc
Rohmer, Ulrich R. Old Testament Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha II: A collection of freely available texts including Nag Hammadi Library [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Sayce, Archibald Henry The Religions of Ancient Egypt and Babylonia [Kindle Edition]
Sertima, Ivan Van editor Black Women in Antiquity Copyright 1984 by journal of African Civilizations Ltd. Inc.
Sertima, Ivan Van The African presence in Ancient America, They Came Before Columbus, Copyright 1976, Published by Random House, New York
Scranton, Laird The Cosmological Origins of Myth and Symbol: From the Dogon and Ancient Egypt to India, Tibet, and China [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Silverman, David P., Ancient Egypt, General Editor, Copyright Duncan Baird Publishers Ltd., Oxford University Press, Inc., 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Stannard, David E., American Holocaust: The Conquest of the New World [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Stoddard, Lothrop The Rising Tide of Color Against White World-Supremacy [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Sunzi, The Art of War [Kindle Edition] translated by Samuel B. Griffith, forward by B.H. Liddell Hart Sold By: Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Thinkmap, Inc. “Image and definition text from the Visual Thesaurus Copyright ©1998-2011 All rights reserved.”
Touré, Michael Eric Dyson (Foreword) Who’s Afraid of Post-Blackness? What It Means to Be Black Now [Kindle Edition]
Umoja, The Interracial Con Game [Kindle Edition] (2011-12-14). Trojan Horse Press. Kindle Edition. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Vanzant, Iyanla Acts of Faith, Daily Meditations for People of Color Copyright © 1993, A Fireside Book/Simon & Schuster, Rockefeller Center, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York 10020
Wagner, Belle M. and Burgoyne, Thomas H. The Light of Egypt; or, the science of the soul and the stars—Volume 2 [Kindle Edition]
Wake, William, Forbidden books of the original New Testament [Kindle Edition]
Walker, Robin, Ancient Egyptian Contributions to Science and Technology (Reklaw Education Lecture Series) [Kindle Edition] Sold by Random House Digital, Inc.
Walker, Robin If you want to learn Early African History START HERE (Reklaw Education Lecture Series) [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Walker, Robin, Intellectual Life and Legacy of Timbuktu (Reklaw Education Lecture Series) (2011-05-22). Reklaw Education Ltd. Kindle Edition. Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Walker, Robin The Mysterious Sciences of the Great Pyramid (Reklaw Education Lecture Series) [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Walker, Robin The Rise and Fall of Black Wall Street (Reklaw Education Lecture Series) [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Walker, Robin Understanding the Book of the Dead (Reklaw Education Lecture Series) [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Walsh, Joan What’s the Matter with White People?: Finding Our Way in the Next America [Kindle Edition] Sold By: Simon and Schuster Digital Sales Inc
Welsing, Frances Cress, Dr., The Isis Papers The Keys to the Colors, Third World Press, Chicago 60619 Copyright © 1991 by Frances Cress Welsing
Whiston, William, Flavius Josephus, Antiquties of the Jews Kindle Edition Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Whiston, William, Flavius Josephus, The Complete Works of Flavius Josephus Kindle Edition Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Whiston, William, Josephus Flavius, Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Wikipedia English The Free Encyclopedia
Winters, Clyde, African Empires in Ancient America [Kindle Edition] Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
Witt, Reginald Eldred, Isis in the Ancient World Copyright © 1971, John Hopkins University Press, 2715 North Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363
Wright, Paul and Herivel Tara Prison Profiteers: Who Makes Money from Mass Incarceration Kindle Edition Sold by Amazon Digital Services, Inc.
About the Author
James M. Lamb, a former alcoholic and drug addict who is now a Certified Drug and Alcohol Counselor and a Certified Clinical Supervisor. He previously worked at San Francisco County Jails, San Quentin State Prison in California and presently works for the Arkansas Department of Correction. Mr. Lamb attended City college of San Francisco, The American Baptist Seminary of the West and UC Berkeley. Reverend Lamb is the Pastor of Lamb of God Ministries, PO Box 1253, Pine Bluff, Arkansas 71613-1253 